12
Multiword Expressions
Timothy Baldwin
UniversityofMelbourne
Su Nam Kim
UniversityofMelbourne12.1 Introduction ..........................................................26712.2 LinguisticPropertiesofMWEs .....................................269
Idiomaticity •OtherPropertiesofMWEs •TestinganExpressionfor
MWEhood •CollocationsandMWEs •AWordonTerminologyand
RelatedFields
12.3 TypesofMWEs.......................................................274
NominalMWEs •VerbalMWEs •PrepositionalMWEs
12.4 MWEClassiﬁcation..................................................27912.5 ResearchIssues .......................................................280
Identiﬁcation •Extraction •InternalSyntacticDisambiguation •MWE
Interpretation
12.6 Summary ..............................................................285Acknowledgments ..........................................................285References....................................................................285
12.1 Introduction
Languages are made up of words, which combine via morphosyntax to encode meaning in the formof phrases and sentences. While it may appear relatively innocuous, the question of what constitutes a“word”isasurprisinglyvexedone.First,are doganddogstwoseparatewords,orvariantsofasingleword?
Thetraditionalviewfromlexicographyandlinguisticsistotreatthemasseparateinﬂectedwordformsofthelexeme dog,asanydiﬀerenceinthesyntax/semanticsofthetwowordsispredictablefromthegeneral
process of noun pluralization in English. Second, what is the status of expressions like top doganddog
days?AspeakerofEnglishwhoknew top,dog,anddayinisolationbuthadneverbeenexposedtothese
two expressions would be hard put to predict the semantics of “person who is in charge” and “periodof inactivity,” respectively.
∗To be able to retrieve the semantics of these expressions, they must have
lexicalstatusofsomeforminthementallexicon, whichencodestheirparticularsemantics. Expressionssuch as these that have surprising properties not predicted by their component words are referred to asmultiwordexpressions(MWEs).
†ThefocusofthischapteristheprecisenatureandtypesofMWEs,and
thecurrentstateofMWEresearchinNLP.
∗AllglossesinthischapteraretakenfromW ORDNET3.0(Fellbaum1998).
†Termsthatarelargelysynonymouswith“multiwordexpression”are“multiwordunit,”“multiwordlexicalitem,”“phrase-
ological unit,” and “ﬁxed expression”; there is also variation in the hyphenation of “multiword,” with “multi-word” incommonuse.
267

268 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
ArmedwithourinformaldescriptionofMWEs,letusﬁrstmotivatethischapterwithabriefoverview
of the range of MWEs, and complexities associated with them. We return to deﬁne MWEs formally inSection12.2.
(1a)–(1b)includeanumberofMWEs,underlined
.
(1) a. Inanutshell ,theadministratorcantakeadvantageof thedatabase’smanyfeaturesthrougha
singleinterface.
b. Youshouldalsojotdown theserialnumber ofyourtelevisionvideo .
As we can see, analogously to simple words, MWEs can occur in a wide range of lexical and syntacticconﬁgurations (e.g., nominal, verbal, and adverbial). Semantically, we can observe diﬀerent eﬀects:in some cases (e.g., serial number andtelevision video), the component words preserve their original
semantics,buttheMWEencodesextrasemantics(e.g.,thefactthata televisionvideo isasingle-unitdevice,
andusuallydesignedtobeportable);inothercases(e.g., inanutshell ,meaning“summedupbrieﬂy”),the
semanticsofoneormoreofthecomponentwordshasnoobviousbearingofthesemanticsoftheMWE.
While all of the MWE examples we have seen to date have occurred as contiguous units, this is not
alwaysthecase:
(2) a. Shelikestotakea
longbath forrelaxationafterexams.
b. Kimhatestoput herfriendsout .
Forexample, in(2a), longisaninternalmodiﬁerandnotacomponentofthebaseMWE takeabath,a s
there is nothing surprising about the syntax of the modiﬁed MWE or the resulting semantics (cf. take a
short/leisurely/warm/mud/...bath ).
How big an issue are MWEs, though? The number of MWEs is estimated to be of the same order of
magnitude as the number of simplex words in a speaker’s lexicon (Jackendoﬀ 1997; Tschichold 1998;Pauwels2000).Atthetypelevel,therefore,MWEsareasmuchofanissueassimplewords.Addedtothis,new(typesof)MWEarecontinuouslycreatedaslanguagesevolve(e.g., shockandawe, carbonfootprint ,
andcreditcrunch )(Gates1988;Tschichold1998;Fazlyetal.2009).
Crosslingually, MWEs have been documented across a broad spectrum of the world’s languages (see
the companion Web site for this chapter for a detailed listing of references). In fact, MWEs are such aneﬃcientwayofprovidingnuanceandfacilitatinglexicalexpansionwitharelativelysmallsimplexlexicon,itishighlydoubtfulthatanylanguagewouldevolvewithoutMWEsofsomedescription.
MWEs are broadly used to enhance ﬂuency and understandability, or mark the register/genre of
language use (Fillmore et al. 1988; Liberman and Sproat 1992; Nunberg et al. 1994; Dirven 2001). Forexample,MWEscanmakelanguagemoreorlessinformal/colloquial(cf. LondonUnderground vs.Tube,
andpiss oﬀvs.annoy). Regionally, MWEs vary considerably. For example, take away andtake outare
identical in meaning, but the former is the preferred expression in British/Australian English, while thelatteristhepreferredexpressioninAmericanEnglish.Otherexamplesare phonebox vs.phonebooth ,lay
thetablevs.setthetable ,andnothroughroad vs.notathroughstreet ,respectively.
ThereisamodestbodyofresearchonmodelingMWEsthathasbeenintegratedintoNLPapplications,
forexample,forthepurposesofﬂuency,robustness,orbetterunderstandingofnaturallanguage.OneareawhereMWEshavetraditionallybeenusedheavily(eitherexplicitlyorimplicitly)ismachinetranslation(MT),asameansofcapturingsubtlesyntactic,semantic,andpragmaticeﬀectsinthesourceandtargetlan-guages(Miyazakietal.1993;GerberandYang1997;Matsuoetal.1997;Melamed1997).UnderstandingMWEs has broad utility in tasks ranging from syntactic disambiguation to conceptual (semantic) com-prehension.ExplicitlexicalizedMWEdatahelpssimplifythesyntacticstructureofsentencesthatincludeMWEs, and conversely, a lack of MWE lexical items in a precision grammar is a signiﬁcant source ofparseerrors(Baldwinetal.2004).Additionally,ithasbeenshownthattheaccuraterecognitionofMWEsinﬂuencestheaccuracyofsemantictagging(Piaoetal.2003),andwordalignmentinMTcanbeimprovedthroughaspeciﬁchandlingofthesyntaxandsemanticsofMWEs(VenkatapathyandJoshi2006).

MultiwordExpressions 269
12.2 Linguistic Properties of MWEs
Weadoptthefollowingformaldeﬁnitionofmultiwordexpression,following(Sagetal.2002):
(3) Multiword expressions (MWEs) are lexical items that: (a) can be decomposed into multiple
lexemes;and(b)displaylexical,syntactic,semantic,pragmaticand/orstatisticalidiomaticity
In languages such as English, the conventional interpretation of the requirement of decomposability
into lexemes is that MWEs must in themselves be made up of multiple whitespace-delimited words.For example, marketing manager is potentially a MWE as it is made up of two lexemes (marketing and
manager),whilefusedwordssuchas lighthouse areconventionallynotclassiﬁedasMWEs.
∗Inlanguages
such as German, the high productivity of compound nouns such as Kontaktlinse “contact lens” (the
concatenation of Kontakt“contact” and Linse“lens”), without whitespace delimitation, means that we
tend to relax this restriction and allow for single-word MWEs. In non-segmenting languages such asJapaneseandChinese(BaldwinandBond2002;Xuetal.2006),wearesparedthisartiﬁcialconsideration.Theabilitytodecomposeanexpressionintomultiplelexemesisstillapplicable,however,andleadstotheconclusion,forexamplethat fukug¯o-hy¯ogen“multiwordexpression”isaMWE(both fukug¯o“compound”
andhy¯ogen“expression”arestandalonelexemes),but buch¯o“departmenthead”is not(bu“department”
isastandalonelexeme,but ch¯o“head”isnot).
The second requirement on a MWE is for it to be idiomatic. We provide a detailed account of
idiomaticityinitsvariousmanifestationsinthefollowingsection.
12.2.1 Idiomaticity
InthecontextofMWEs, idiomaticityreferstomarkednessordeviationfromthebasicpropertiesofthecomponentlexemes,andappliesatthelexical,syntactic,semantic,pragmatic,and/orstatisticallevels.AgivenMWEisoftenidiomaticatmultiplelevels(e.g.,syntactic,semantic,andstatisticalinthecaseof by
andlarge),aswereturntoillustrateinSection12.2.3.
Closelyrelatedtothenotionofidiomaticityis compositionality,whichweconsidertobethedegreeto
which the features of the parts of a MWE combine to predict the features of the whole. While composi-tionalityisoftenconstruedasapplyingexclusivelytosemanticidiomaticity(henceby“non-compositionalMWE,” researchers tend to mean a semantically idiomatic MWE), in practice it can apply across all thesamelevelsasidiomaticity.Below,wepresentanitemizedaccountofeachsubtypeofidiomaticity.12.2.1.1 Lexical IdiomaticityLexicalidiomaticityoccurswhenoneormorecomponentsofanMWEarenotpartoftheconventionalEnglishlexicon.Forexample, adhocislexicallymarkedinthatneitherofitscomponents( adandhoc)are
standaloneEnglishwords.
†Lexicalidiomaticityinevitablyresultsinsyntacticandsemanticidiomaticity
becausethereisnolexicalknowledgeassociateddirectlywiththepartsfromwhichtopredictthebehavioroftheMWE.Assuch,itisoneofthemostclear-cutandpredictivepropertiesofMWEhood.12.2.1.2 Syntactic IdiomaticitySyntactic idiomaticity occurs when the syntax of the MWE is not derived directly from that of itscomponents(Chafe1968; Bauer1983; Sagetal. 2002; KatzandPostal2004). Forexample, by and large,
issyntacticallyidiomaticinthatitisadverbialinnature, butmadeupoftheanomalouscoordinationofa preposition (by ) and an adjective (large). On the other hand, take a walk is not syntactically marked
∗Inpractice,asigniﬁcantsubsetofresearchonEnglishnouncompounds(seeSection12.3.1)hasconsideredbothfusedand
whitespace-separatedexpressions.
†Note that the idiomaticity is diminished if the speaker has knowledge of the Latin origins of the term. Also, while the
componentwordsdonothavestatusasstandalonelexicalitems,theydooccurinotherMWEs(e.g., adnauseum, posthoc).

270 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
as it is a simple verb–object combination that is derived transparently from a transitive verb ( walk)a n d
a countable noun ( walk). Syntactic idiomaticity can also occur at the constructional level, in classes of
MWEshavingsyntacticpropertiesthatarediﬀerentiatedfromtheircomponentwords,forexample,verbparticleconstructions(Section12.3.2.1)anddeterminerlessprepositionalphrases(Section12.3.3.1).12.2.1.3 Semantic IdiomaticitySemantic idiomaticity is the property of the meaning of a MWE not being explicitly derivable from itsparts (Chafe 1968; Bauer 1983; Sag et al. 2002; Katz and Postal 2004). For example, middle of the road
usually signiﬁes“non-extremism, especiallyin politicalviews,” which we could not readily predictfromeithermiddleorroad. On the other hand, to and fro is not semantically marked as its semantics is fully
predictablefromitsparts.Manycasesarenotasclearcutasthese,however.Thesemanticsof blowhotand
cold(“constantly change opinion”), for example, is partially predictable from blow(“move” and hence
“change”), but not as immediately from hot and cold . There are also cases where the meanings of the
parts are transparently inherited but there is additional semantic content that has no overt realization.One such example is bus driver where, modulo the eﬀects of word sense disambiguation (WSD), bus
anddriverbothhavetheirexpectedmeanings,butthereisadditionallythedefaultexpectationthata bus
driveris“onewhodrivesabus”andnot“onewhodrives likeabus”or“anobjectfordrivingbuseswith,”
forexample.
Closely related to the issue of semantic idiomaticity is the notion of ﬁguration, that is, the property
of the components of a MWE having some metaphoric (e.g., take the bull by the horns ), hyperbolic
(e.g.,not worth the paper it’s printed on ), or metonymic (e.g., lend a hand ) meaning in addition to
their literal meaning (Fillmore et al. 1988; Nunberg et al. 1994). As an illustration of decomposabilityvia metaphorical ﬁguration, consider the English idiom spill the beans. Assuming a formal semantic
representationof reveal
′(secret′)fortheMWE,wecancoercethesemanticsof spillandbeansinto
reveal′andsecret′, respectively, to arrive at a ﬁgurative interpretation of the MWE semantics. A
compositionality analysis would not be able to predict this regularity as these senses for spillandbeans
are not readily available outside this particular MWE. Predictably, MWEs vary in the immediacy oftheirdecomposability—with getthenod beingmoretransparentlydecomposablethan spillthebeans,for
example—andnotallMWEsaredecomposable(cf. kickthebucket ).Wereturntodiscusstheinteraction
betweendecomposabilityandsyntacticﬂexibilityinSection12.3.2.4.
One intriguing aspect of semantic idiomaticity is that higher-usage MWEs are generally perceived to
belesssemanticallyidiomatic,oratleastmorereadilydecomposable(KeysarandBly1995).12.2.1.4 Pragmatic IdiomaticityPragmatic idiomaticity is the condition of a MWE being associated with a ﬁxed set of situations or aparticular context (Kastovsky 1982; Jackendoﬀ 1997; Sag et al. 2002). Good morning andall aboard
are examples of pragmatic MWEs: the ﬁrst is a greeting associated speciﬁcally with mornings
∗and the
second is a command associated with the speciﬁc situation of a train station or dock, and the imminentdeparture of a train or ship. Pragmatically idiomatic MWEs are often ambiguous with (non-situated)literaltranslations;forexample, goodmorning canmean“pleasantmorning”(cf. Kimhadagoodmorning
).
12.2.1.5 Statistical IdiomaticityStatistical idiomaticity occurs when a particular combination of words occurs with markedly high fre-quency, relative to the component words or alternative phrasings of the same expression (Cruse 1986;Sagetal.2002).Forexample, inTable12.1,wepresentanillustrationofstatisticalidiomaticity,adaptedfrom Cruse (1986, p. 281). The example is based on the cluster of near-synonym adjectives ( ﬂawless,
immaculate, impeccable,and spotless),andtheiraﬃnitytopremodifyarangeofnouns.Foragivenpair-
ingofadjectiveandnoun, weindicatethecompatibilityintheform ofdiscretemarkers(“+”indicatesa
∗Whichisnottosaythatitcannotbeusedironicallyatothertimesoftheday!

MultiwordExpressions 271
TABLE12.1 ExamplesofStatisticalIdiomaticity
ﬂawless immaculate impeccable spotless
condition +− ++
credentials −− +−
hair −+ ? −
house ? + ? +
logic +− +−
timing ? ++ −
Note:“+” = strong lexical aﬃnity, “?” = neutral lexical aﬃnity, “ −”=
negativelexicalaﬃnity.
positivelexicalaﬃnity,“?”indicatesaneutrallexicalaﬃnity,and“−”indicatesanegativelexicalaﬃnity).For example, immaculate has a strong lexical aﬃnity with performance (i.e.,immaculate performance is
a relatively common expression), whereas spotlesshas a negative aﬃnity with credentials (i.e.,spotless
credentials is relatively infrequent). There may, of course, be phonological, semantic, or other grounds
for particular adjective–noun combinations being more or less frequent; statistical idiomaticity is sim-ply an observation of the relative frequency of a given combination. It is also important to note thatstatistical idiomaticity is a continuously graded phenomenon, and our predictions about lexical aﬃnityin Table 12.1 are most naturally interpreted as a ranking of the propensity for each of the adjectives tooccur as a pre-modiﬁer of record; for example, impeccable andspotlessare more probable choices than
immaculate,whichisinturnmoreprobablethan ﬂawless.
Anotherstrikingcaseofstatisticalidiomaticityiswithbinomialssuchas blackandwhite—asin blackand
whitetelevision —wherethereversenounorderingdoesnotpreservethelexicalizedsemanticsoftheword
combination (cf. ?white and black television ) (Benor and Levy 2006). The arbitrariness of the preferred
noun order in English is poignantly illustrated by it being reversed in other languages, for example,shirokuro “whiteandblack”and blancoynegro “whiteandblack”inJapaneseandSpanish,respectively.
Statisticalidiomaticityrelatescloselytothenotionofinstitutionalization(a.k.a.conventionalization),
that is, a particular word combination coming to be used to refer a given object (Fernando and Flavell1981; Bauer1983; Nunbergetal. 1994; Sagetal. 2002). Forexample, traﬃclight istheconventionalized
descriptor for “a visual signal to control the ﬂow of traﬃc at intersections.” There is no ap r i o r ireason
w h yi ts h o u l dn o ti n s t e a db ec a l l e datraﬃc director orintersection regulator , but the simple fact of the
matter is that it is not referred to using either of those expressions; instead, traﬃc light was historically
establishedasthecanonicaltermforreferringtotheobject.Similarly,itisanarbitraryfactoftheEnglishlanguagethatwesay manythanks andnot
∗severalthanks,and saltandpepper inpreferenceto pepperand
salt.∗We term these anti-collocations of the respective MWEs (Pearce 2001): lexico-syntactic variants
of MWEs that have unexpectedly low frequency, and in doing so, contrastively highlight the statisticalidiomaticityofthetargetexpression.
†
12.2.2 Other Properties of MWEs
OthercommonpropertiesofMWEaresingle-wordparaphrasability,proverbiality,andprosody.Unlikeidiomaticity,wheresomeformofidiomaticityisanecessaryfeatureofMWEs,theseotherpropertiesareneither necessary nor suﬃcient. Prosody relates to semantic idiomaticity, while the other properties areindependentofidiomaticityasdescribedabove.
∗Whichisnottosaytherewasnotgroundsfortheselectionofthecanonicalformatitsgenesis,forexample,forhistorical,
crosslingual,orphonologicalreasons.
†Thetermanti-collocationoriginatedinthecontextofcollocationresearch(seeSection12.2.4).Whilenotingthepotential
for confusion, we use it in the broader context of MWEs as a tool for analyzing the statistical idiomaticity of a candidateMWErelativetoalternativeformsofthesamebasicexpression.

272 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
•CrosslingualvariationThere is remarkable variation in MWEs across languages (Villavicencio et al. 2004). In somecases, there is direct lexico-syntactic correspondence for a crosslingual MWE pair with similarsemantics. For example, in the red has a direct lexico-syntactic correlate in Portuguese with the
samesemantics: novermelho ,w h e r enoisthecontractionof inandthe,vermelho meansred,a n d
bothidiomsareprepositionalphrases(PPs). Othershaveidenticalsyntaxbutdiﬀerlexically. Forexample, intheblack correspondsto noazul(“intheblue”)inPortuguese,withadiﬀerentchoice
ofcolorterm( blueinsteadof black).Moreobtusely, bringthecurtaindownon correspondstothe
Portuguese botarumpontoﬁnalem (lit.“puttheﬁnaldotin”),withsimilarsyntacticmakeupbut
radically diﬀerent lexical composition. Other MWEs again are lexically similar but syntacticallydiﬀerentiated. For example, in a corner (e.g.,The media has him in a corner )a n dencurralado
(“cornered”)aresemanticallyequivalentbutrealizedbydiﬀerentconstructions—aPPinEnglishandanadjectiveinPortuguese.
ThereareofcoursemanyMWEsthathavenodirecttranslationequivalentinasecondlanguage.
For example, the Japanese MWE zoku-giiN , meaning “legislators championing the causes of
selectedindustries”hasnodirecttranslationinEnglish(TanakaandBaldwin2003).Equally,therearetermswhicharerealizedasMWEsinonelanguagebutsingle-wordlexemesinanother, suchasinterestrate anditsJapaneseequivalent riritsu.
•Single-wordparaphrasabilitySingle-word paraphrasability is the observation that signiﬁcant numbers of MWEs can be para-phrased with a single word (Chafe 1968; Gibbs 1980; Fillmore et al. 1988; Liberman and Sproat1992; Nunberg et al. 1994). While some MWEs are single-word paraphrasable (e.g., leave out =
omit), others are not (e.g., look up=?). Also, MWEs with arguments can sometimes be para-
phrasable(e.g., takeoﬀ
clothes=undress),justasnon-MWEscomprisedofmultiplewordscanbe
single-wordparaphrasable(e.g., dropsharply =plummet).
•ProverbialityProverbialityistheabilityofaMWEto“describeandimplicitlytoexplainarecurrentsituationofparticularsocialinterestinthevirtueofitsresemblanceorrelationtoascenarioinvolvinghomely,concretethingsandrelations”(Nunbergetal.1994).Forexample,verbparticleconstructionsandidiomsareoftenindicatorsofmoreinformalsituations(e.g., pissoﬀisaninformalformof annoy,
anddropoﬀisaninformalformof fallasleep).
•ProsodyMWEs can have distinct prosody, that is stress patterns, from compositional language (Fillmoreetal. 1988; LibermanandSproat1992; Nunbergetal. 1994). Forexample, whenthecomponentsdo not make an equal contribution to the semantics of the whole, MWEs can be prosodicallymarked, for example, soft spotis prosodically marked (due to the stress on softrather than spot),
although ﬁrst aidandred herring are not. Note that prosodic marking can equally occur with
non-MWEs,suchas dentaloperation.
12.2.3 Testing an Expression for MWEhood
Above, we described ﬁve diﬀerent forms of idiomaticity, along with a number of other properties ofMWEs.WebringthesetogetherincategorizingaselectionofMWEsinTable12.2.
Takingtheexampleoftheverbparticleconstruction lookup(inthesenseof“seekinformationfrom,”
asinKimlookedthewordupinthedictionary ),weﬁrstobservethatitismadeupofmultiplewords( look
andup),andthussatisﬁestheﬁrstrequirementinourMWEdeﬁnition.Intermsofidiomaticity:(1)itis
notlexicallyidiomatic,asboth lookanduparepartofthestandardEnglishlexicon;(2)whileithaspeculiar
syntax relative to its component words, in upbeing separable from look, this is a general property of
transitiveverbparticleconstructions(seeSection12.3.2.1)ratherthanthisparticularwordcombination,

MultiwordExpressions 273
TABLE12.2 ClassiﬁcationofMWEsinTermsofTheirIdiomaticity
Lexical Syntactic Semantic Pragmatic Statistical
allaboard −− − + +
busdriver −− + − +
byandlarge −+ + − +
kickthebucket −− + − +
lookup −− + − +
shockandawe −− − + +
socialbutterﬂy −− + − +
takeawalk −− + − ?
toandfro ? +− − +
traﬃclight −− + − +
eatchocolate −− − − −
soitisnotsyntacticallyidiomatic; (3)itissemanticallyidiomatic, asthesemanticsof“seekinformationfrom”isnotpredictablefromthestandardsemanticsof lookandup;(4)itisnotpragmaticallyidiomatic,
as it does not generally evoke a particular situation; and (5) it is statistically marked, as it contrasts withanti-collocations such as *see/watch up
∗and is a relatively frequent expression in English. That is, it is
semanticallyandstatisticallyidiomatic;incombinationwithitsmultiwordcomposition,thisissuﬃcienttoclassifyitasaMWE.
InTable12.2, kickthebucket (inthesenseof“die”)hasonlyoneformofidiomaticity(semantic),while
all the other examples have at least two forms of idiomaticity. Traﬃc light , for example, is statistically
idiomaticinthatitisbothacommonexpressioninEnglishandstandsinoppositiontoanti-collocationssuch as*vehicle light/traﬃc lamp, and it is semantically idiomatic in that the particular semantics of
“a visual signal to control the ﬂow of traﬃc” is not explicitly represented in the component words (e.g.,interpretations such as “a visual signal to indicate the ﬂow of traﬃc,” “a device for lighting the way oftraﬃc,” or“alampwhichindicatestherelativeﬂowofdata”thatarepredictedbythecomponentwordsarenotreadilyavailable).Othernoteworthyclaimsaboutidiomaticityare shockandawe ispragmatically
idiomaticbecauseofitsparticularassociationwiththecommencementoftheIraqWarin2003; takeawalk
issemanticallyidiomaticbecausethissenseof takeisparticulartothisandotherlightverbconstructions
(seeSection12.3.2.3),anddistinctfromtheliteralsenseoftheverb;and toandfro issyntacticallyidiomatic
becauseof therelativesyntacticopacityof theantiquated fro, and (somewhat)lexicallyidiomaticasitis
usedalmostexclusivelyinthecontextof toandfro.
†
Table12.2includesonenegativeexample: eatchocolate .Whileitsatisﬁestherequirementformultiword
decomposability(i.e.,itismadeupofmorethanoneword),itclearlylackslexical,syntactic,semantic,andpragmatic idiomaticity. We would claim that it is also not statistically idiomatic. One possible counter-argument could be that eatis one of the most common verbs associated with chocolate,b u tt h es a m e
argument could be made for almost any foodstuﬀ in combination with eat. Possible anti-collocations
suchasconsumechocolate ormunchonchocolate arealsoperfectlyacceptable.
12.2.4 Collocations and MWEs
A common term in NLP that relates closely to our discussion of MWEs is collocation. A widely useddeﬁnition for collocation is “an arbitrary and recurrent word combination” (Benson 1990), or in ourterms, a statistically idiomatic MWE (esp. of high frequency). While there is considerable variationbetweenindividualresearchers,collocationsareoftendistinguishedfrom“idioms”or“non-compositional
∗Undertheconstraintthat upisaparticle;examplessuchas seeyouuptheroad occurreadily,butarenotconsideredtobe
anti-collocationsas upisa(transitive)preposition.
†Words such as this that occur only as part of a ﬁxed expression are known variously as cranberry words or bound words
(Aronoﬀ1976;Moon1998;Trawińskietal.2008)(otherexamplesare tenterhooks andcaboodle),andtheexpressionsthat
containthemareoftentermedcranberryexpressions(e.g., ontenterhooks andthewholecaboodle ).

274 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
phrases”onthegroundsthattheyarenotsyntacticallyidiomatic,andiftheyaresemanticallyidiomatic,itisthrougharelativelytransparentprocessofﬁgurationormetaphor(Choueka1988;Lin1998;McKeownandRadev2000;Evert2004).Additionally,muchworkoncollocationsfocusesexclusivelyonpredeterminedconstructional templates (e.g., adjective–noun or verb–noun collocations). In Table 12.2, for examplesocialbutterﬂy isanuncontroversialinstanceofacollocation,but lookupandtoandfro wouldtendnot
tobeclassiﬁedascollocations.Assuch,collocationsformapropersubsetofMWEs.
12.2.5 A Word on Terminology and Related Fields
ItisworthmakingmentionofanumberoftermsthatrelatetoMWEs.
Thetermidiomvariesconsiderablyinitsusage,fromanykindofmultiworditemtoonlythoseMWEs
that are semantically idiomatic; even here, there are those who consider idioms to be MWEs that areexclusively semanticallyidiomatic(alsosometimestermedpureidioms),andthosethatrestricttheterm
to particular syntactic subtypes of semantically idiomatic MWEs (Fillmore et al. 1988; Nunberg et al.1994; Moon 1998; Huddleston and Pullum 2002). To avoid confusion, we will avoid using this term inthischapter.
The ﬁeld of terminology has a rich history of research on multiword terms, which relates closely to
MWEs(Sager1990;JustesonandKatz1995;Frantzietal.2000;Kageuraetal.2004).Themajordiﬀerenceisthatterminologyresearchisprimarilyinterestedinidentifyingandclassifyingtechnicaltermsspeciﬁcto a particular domain (both MWEs and simplex lexemes) and predicting patterns of variation in thoseterms. It is thus broader in scope than MWEs in the sense that simple lexemes can equally be technicalterms,andnarrowerinthesensethannontechnicalMWEsarenotofinteresttotheﬁeld.
PhraseologyisanotherﬁeldwitharichtraditionhistoryrelatingtoMWEs(CowieandHowarth1996;
Cowie2001).ItoriginallygrewoutoftheworkofMel’čukandothersinRussiaonMeaning-TextTheory(Mel’čuk and Polguère 1987), but more recently has taken on elements from the work of Sinclair andothersinthecontextofcorpuslinguisticsandcorpus-basedlexicography(Sinclair1991).PhraseologyisprimarilyinterestedinthedescriptionandfunctionalclassiﬁcationofMWEs(including“sentence-like”units,suchasphrasesandquotations),fromatheoreticalperspective.
12.3 Types of MWEs
In this section, we detail a selection of the major MWE types that have received particular attention intheMWEliterature.WewilltendtofocusonEnglishMWEsforexpositorypurposes,butprovidetie-instocorrespondingMWEsinotherlanguageswherepossible.
12.3.1 Nominal MWEs
NominalMWEsareoneofthemostcommonMWEtypes,intermsoftokenfrequency,typefrequency,and their occurrence in the world’s languages (Tanaka and Baldwin 2003; Lieber and Štekauer 2009).In English, the primary type of nominal MWE is the noun compound (NC), where two or more nounscombine to form a ¯N, such as golf cluborcomputer science department (Lauer 1995; Huddleston and
Pullum 2002; Sag et al. 2002); the rightmost noun in the NC is termed the head noun (i.e., cluband
department , respectively) and the remainder of the component(s) modiﬁer(s) (i.e., golfandcomputer
science, respectively).
∗WithinNCs, thereisthesubsetofcompoundnominalizations, wheretheheadis
deverbal (e.g., investor hesitation orstress avoidance ). There is also the broader class of nominal MWEs
∗In fact, the norm among Germanic languages (e.g., Danish, Dutch, German, Norwegian, and Swedish) is for NCs to be
realizedasasinglecompoundword(Bauer2001). Solarcell, forexample, is zonnecelinDutch, Solarzelle inGerman, and
solcellinSwedish.SeeSection12.2forcommentsontheircompatibilitywithourdeﬁnitionofMWE.

MultiwordExpressions 275
where the modiﬁers are not restricted to be nominal, but can also be verbs (usually present or pastparticiples,suchas connectingﬂight orhiredhelp)oradjectives(e.g., opensecret ).Toavoidconfusion,we
willtermthisbroadersetofnominalMWEsnominalcompounds.InRomancelanguagessuchasItalian,thereistheadditionalclassofcomplexnominalsthatincludeaprepositionorothermarkerbetweenthenouns,suchas succodilimone “lemonjuice”and portaavetri “glassdoor.”
∗
OnepropertyofNCsthathasputtheminthespotlightofNLPresearchistheirunderspeciﬁedsemantics.
Forexample,whilesharingthesamehead,thereislittlesemanticcommonalitybetween nuttree,clothes
tree,andfamilytree:a nuttreeisatreethatbearsediblenuts;a clothestree isapieceoffurnitureshaped
somewhatlikeatree,forhangingclotheson;anda familytree isagraphicaldepictionofthegenealogical
historyofafamily(whichcanbeshapedlikeatree). Ineachcase, themeaningofthecompound relates(if at times obtusely!) to a sense of both the head and the modiﬁer, but the precise relationship is highlyvaried and not represented explicitly in any way. Furthermore, while it may be possible to argue thatthesearealllexicalizedNCswithexplicitsemanticrepresentationsinthementallexicon,nativespeakersgenerallyhavereasonablysharpintuitionsaboutthesemanticsofnovelcompounds.Forexample,a bed
treeis most plausibly a tree that beds are made from or perhaps for sleeping in, and a reﬂection tree
couldbeatreeforreﬂectingin/nearorperhapsthereﬂectedimageofatree.Similarly,contextcanevokeirregular interpretations of high-frequency compounds (Downing 1977; Spärck Jones 1983; CopestakeandLascarides1997;Gagnéetal.2005).Thissuggeststhatthereisadynamicinterpretationprocessthattakesplace,whichcomplementsencyclopedicinformationaboutlexicalizedcompounds.
Onepopularapproachtocapturingthesemanticsofcompoundnounsisviaaﬁnitesetofrelations.For
example, orangejuice, steelbridge,and paperhat couldallbeanalyzedasbelongingtothe
MAKErelation,
whereHEADis made from MODIFIER. This observation has led to the development of a bewildering range
of semantic relation sets of varying sizes, based on abstract relations (Vanderwende 1994; Barker andSzpakowicz1998;RosarioandHearst2001;Moldovanetal.2004;Nastaseetal.2006),directparaphrases,for example, using prepositions or verbs (Lauer 1995; Lapata 2002; Grover et al. 2004; Nakov 2008), orvarioushybridsofthetwo(Levi1978;Vanderwende1994;ÓSéaghdha2008).Thisstyleofapproachhasbeenhamperedbyissuesincludinglowinter-annotatoragreement(especiallyforlargersemanticrelationsets), coverage over data from diﬀerent domains, the impact of context on interpretation, how to dealwith “fringe” instances which do not quite ﬁt any of the relations, and how to deal with interpretationalambiguity(Downing1977;SpärckJones1983;ÓSéaghdha2008).
AnadditionalareaofinterestwithnominalMWEs(especiallyNCs)isthesyntacticdisambiguationof
MWEswiththreeormoreterms.Forexample, glasswindowcleaner canbesyntacticallyanalyzedaseither
(glass (window cleaner)) (i.e., “a window cleaner made of glass,” or similar) or ((glass window) cleaner)
(i.e.,“acleanerofglasswindows”).Syntacticambiguityimpactsonboththesemanticinterpretationandthe prosody of the MWE. The task of disambiguating syntactic ambiguity in nominal MWEs is calledbracketing.WereturntodiscussthebasicapproachestobracketinginSection12.5.3.
12.3.2 Verbal MWEs
12.3.2.1 Verb-Particle ConstructionsVerb-particleconstructions(VPCs,alsosometimestermedparticleverbsorphrasalverbs)aremadeupofaverbandanobligatoryparticle,typicallyintheformofanintransitivepreposition(e.g., playaround ,take
oﬀ),butincludingadjectives(e.g., cutshort,bandtogether )andverbs(e.g., letgo,letﬂy)(Bolinger1976;
Jackendoﬀ 1997; Huddleston and Pullum 2002; McIntyre 2007). English VPCs relate closely to particleverbs (a.k.a. separable verbs) in languages such as German (Lüdeling 2001), Dutch (Booij 2002), andEstonian (Kaalep and Muischnek 2008), but the construction has its own peculiarities in each language
∗Our use of the term complex nominal for MWEs of form N P N should not be confused with that of Levi (1978), which
includedNCsandnominalcompounds.

276 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
thatgobeyondtheboundsofthischapter.Toavoidconfusion,wewillfocusexclusivelyonEnglishVPCsinourdiscussionhere.
ThedistinguishingpropertiesofEnglishVPCsare:
•TransitiveVPCscanoccurineitherthejoined(e.g., Kimputon
thesweater )orsplit(e.g., Kimput
thesweateron )wordorderinthecasethattheobjectNPisnotpronominal
•Transitive VPCs must occur in the split word order if the object NP is pronominal (e.g., Kim
polisheditoﬀvs.∗Kimpolishedoﬀ it).
•Manner adverbs do not readily occur between the verb and particle, in both intransitive andtransitive VPCs (e.g.,
?∗Kim played habitually around ,∗Kim made quickly up her mind). Note,
thereisasmallsetofdegreeadverbsthatreadilypremodifyparticles, notably right(e.g.,Myturn
iscomingright up)andback(e.g.,Kimputthesweaterback on)
All of these properties are deﬁned at the construction level and common to all VPCs, however, beggingthe question of where the idiomaticity comes in that allows us to deﬁne them as MWEs. The answeris, in the main, semantic and statistical idiosyncrasies. For example, the semantics of polishinpolish oﬀ
(e.g.,polish oﬀ dessert ,polish oﬀ the hitman ,polish oﬀ my homework ) is diﬀerentiated from that of the
simplexlexeme.Conversely, swallowdown (e.g.,swallowdownthedrink)preservesthesemanticsofboth
swallowanddown(i.e., the liquid is swallowed, and as a result goes down [the esophagus]), and is thus
conventionallynotconsideredbeaMWE.
VPCs are highly frequent in English text, but the distribution is highly skewed toward a minority of
theVPCtypes,withthemajorityofVPCsoccurringveryinfrequently(Baldwin2005a).Thisisbadnewsif we want to build a parser with full coverage, for example, as we need to capture the long tail of VPCtypes. Compounding the problem, the construction is highly productive. For example, the completiveup(e.g.,eat/ﬁnish/rest/...up)cancombineproductivelywithalargearrayofactionverbstoformaVPC
withpredictablesyntaxandsemantics, whichwecouldneverhopetoexhaustivelylist. Havingsaidthis,there are large numbers of semantically idiomatic VPCs that need to be recorded in the lexicon if wewish to capture their semantics correctly. Even here, VPCs populate the spectrum of compositionalityrelativetotheircomponents(Lidner1983;Brinton1985;Jackendoﬀ2002;Bannardetal.2003;McCarthyet al. 2003; Cook and Stevenson 2006), so while some VPCs are clear candidates for lexicalization interms of their semantic idiomaticity (e.g., make out ,a si nKim madeout
the cheque to Sandy orKim
and Sandy madeout ), others are semantically closer to the semantics of their component words (e.g.,
check out ,blow over ) and to some degree derivable from their component words. One approach to
representingthiscontinuumofVPCsemanticsisthatofBannardetal.(2003),whosubclassifyVPCsintofour compositionality classes based on the independent semantic contribution of the verb and particle:(1)theVPCinheritsitssemanticsfromtheverbandparticle(i.e., isnotsemanticallyidiomatic); (2)theVPC inherits semantics from the verb only; (3) the VPC inherits semantics from the particle only; and(4)theVPCinheritssemanticsfromneithertheverbnortheparticle.Asecondapproachistoemployaone-dimensional classiﬁcation of holistic VPC compositionality (e.g., in the form of a integer scale of 0to10(McCarthyetal.2003)).12.3.2.2 Prepositional VerbsPrepositional verbs (PVs) relate closely to VPCs in being comprised of a verb and selected preposition,with the crucial diﬀerence that the preposition is transitive (e.g., refer to,look for) (Jackendoﬀ 1973;
O’Dowd1998;HuddlestonandPullum2002;Baldwin2005b;Osswaldetal.2006).EnglishPVsoccurintwo basic forms: (1) ﬁxed preposition PVs (e.g., come across ,grow on), where there is a hard constraint
of the verb and selected preposition being strictly adjacent; and (2) mobile preposition PVs (e.g., refer
to,send for), where the selected preposition is adjacent to the verb in the canonical word order, but
undergoeslimitedsyntacticalternation.Forexample,mobileprepositionPVsallowlimitedcoordinationofPPobjects(e.g., referto
thebookandto theDVDvs.∗comeacross thebookandacross theDVD),andthe

MultiwordExpressions 277
NPobjectoftheselectedprepositioncanbepassivised(e.g., thebookwasreferredto vs.∗Iwasgrownon
bythebook).
PVs are highly frequent in general text, and notoriously hard to distinguish from VPCs and simple
verb–prepositioncombinations,forexampleinparsingapplications.12.3.2.3 Light-Verb ConstructionsLight-verb constructions (i.e., LVCs) are made up of a verb and a noun complement, often in theindeﬁnite singular form (Jespersen 1965; Abeillé 1988; Miyagawa 1989; Grefenstette and Tapanainen1994; Hoshi 1994; Huddleston and Pullum 2002; Sag et al. 2002; Butt 2003; Stevenson et al. 2004). Thename of the construction comes from the verb being semantically bleached or “light,” in the sense thattheir contribution to the meaning of the LVC is relatively small in comparison with that of the nouncomplement. In fact, the contribution of the light verb is so slight that in many cases, the LVC can beparaphrasedwiththeverbalformofthenouncomplement(e.g., takeawalk vs.walkortakeaphotograph
vs.photograph). LVCs are also sometimes termed verb-complement pairs (Tan et al. 2006) or support
verbconstructions(Calzolarietal.2002).
ThefollowingaretheprinciplelightverbsinEnglish:
•do,forexample, doademo ,doadrawing ,doareport
•give,forexample, giveawave ,giveasigh, giveakiss
•have,forexample, havearest ,haveadrink, havepity(on)
•make,forexample, makeanoﬀer ,makeanattempt ,makeamistake
•take,forexample, takeawalk, takeabath, takeaphotograph
There is some disagreement in the scope of the term LVC, most notably in the membership of verbs
thatcanbeconsidered“light.”Calzolarietal.(2002),forexample,arguedthatthedeﬁnitionofLVCs(orsupportverbconstructionsintheirterms)shouldbeextendedtoinclude:(1)verbsthatcombinewithaneventnoun(deverbalorotherwise)wherethesubjectisaparticipantintheeventmostcloselyidentiﬁedwith the noun (e.g., ask a question); and (2) verbs with subjects that belong to some scenario associated
withthefullunderstandingoftheeventtypedesignatedbytheobjectnoun(e.g., keepapromise).
Morphologically, the verb in LVCs inﬂects but the noun complement tends to have a ﬁxed num-
ber and a preference for determiner type. For example, make amends undergoes full verbal inﬂection
(make/makes/made/making
amends),butthenouncomplementcannotbesingular(e.g.,∗makeamend∗).
Syntactically,LVCsarehighlyﬂexible,undergoingpassivization(e.g., anoﬀerwasmade),extraction(e.g.,
HowmanyoﬀersdidKimmake? )andinternalmodiﬁcation(e.g., makeanirresistibleoﬀer ).Ontheother
hand, there are hard constraints on what light verbs a given noun complement can be combined with(cf.
∗give/do/put/take an oﬀer ), noting that some noun complements combine with multiple light verbs
(e.g.,do/giveademo ),oftenwithdiﬀerentsemantics(e.g., makeacall vs.takeacall vs.haveacall ).Also,
what light verb a given noun will combine with to form an LVC is often consistent across semanticallyrelatednounclusters(e.g., giveacry/moan/howl vs.
∗takeacry/moan/howl ).
LVCsoccuracrossalargenumberoftheworld’slanguages,includingJapanese(GrimshawandMester
1988;BaldwinandBond2002),Korean(Ahn1991),Hindi(Mohanan1994),andPersian(Karimi-Doostan1997).12.3.2.4 Verb–Noun Idiomatic CombinationsVerb–NounIdiomaticCombinations (VNICs,alsoknownasVPidioms)arecomposedofaverbandnoun
in direct object position, and are (at least) semantically idiomatic (e.g., kick the bucket ,shoot the breeze )
∗Butalsonoteotherexampleswherethenouncomplementcanbeeithersingularorplural,forexample, takeabath vs.take
baths.

278 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
(Nunberg et al. 1994; Fellbaum 2002; Sag et al. 2002; Fazly et al. 2009). They are a notable subclass ofMWEbecauseoftheircrosslingualoccurrence,andhighlexicalandsemanticvariability.
VNICs (along with other semantically idiomatic MWEs) are often categorized into two groups,
based on their semantic decomposability (see Section 12.2.1.3) (Nunberg et al. 1994; Riehemann2001). With decomposable VNICs, given the interpretation of the VNIC, it is possible to associatecomponents of the VNIC with distinct elements of the VNIC interpretation, based on semantics notimmediately accessible from the component lexemes. Assuming an interpretation of spill the beans
such asreveal’(x ,secret’),
∗for example, we could analyze spillas having the semantics of
reveal’ andbeanshaving the semantics of secret’, through a process of ﬁguration. Other exam-
ples of decomposable VNICs are pull strings (cf.exert’(x ,influence’) )a n dtouch a nerve (cf.
cause’(x ,reaction’) ). With non-decomposable VNICs (e.g., get the hang (of) ,kick the bucket ),
suchasemanticdecompositionisnotpossible.ThereasonwemakethisdistinctionisthatdecomposableVNICs tend to be syntactically ﬂexible, in a manner predicted by the nature of the semantic decompo-sition; non-decomposable VNICs, on the other hand, tend not to be syntactically ﬂexible (Cruse 1986;Nunbergetal.1994;Jackendoﬀ1997;Sagetal.2002).Forexample, spillthebeans canbepassivized( It’s
ashamethebeanswerespilled )andinternallymodiﬁed(AT&TspilledtheStarbucksbeans ),similarlytoa
conventionalverb–directobjectpair(cf. SandyislovedbyKim andKimlovestheinimitableSandy );this
ispredictedbyitsdecomposability.
VNICsgenerallyoccurwithlowfrequency,butarenotoriouslyhardtodistinguishfromliteralusagesof
thesamewordcombination(e.g., Kimmadeaface
atthepoliceman vs.Kimmadeaface inpotteryclass).
Anaccuratemeansofdisambiguationisthusimportantintasksthatrequiresemanticinterpretation,butgenerallyfraughtbylowvolumesoftrainingdata.
12.3.3 Prepositional MWEs
12.3.3.1 Determinerless-Prepositional PhrasesDeterminerlessprepositionalphrases(PP-Ds)areMWEsthataremadeupofaprepositionandasingularnoun without a determiner (Quirk et al. 1985; Sag et al. 2002; Huddleston and Pullum 2002; Baldwinetal.2006).
Syntactically,PP-Dsarehighlydiverse,anddisplaydiﬀeringlevelsofsyntacticmarkedness,productiv-
ity,andmodiﬁability(Ross1995;Chander1998).Thatis,somePP-Dsarenonproductive(e.g., ontopvs.
∗on bottom ) and nonmodiﬁable (e.g., on topvs.∗on tabletop), whereas others are fully productive (e.g.,
bycar/foot/bus/... )andhighlymodiﬁable(e.g., athighexpense,onsummer vacation).Infact,whilesome
PP-Ds are optionally modiﬁable (e.g., on vacation vs.on summer vacation), others require modiﬁcation
(e.g.,∗atlevelvs.ateyelevel,and∗atexpense vs.atcompanyexpense )(Baldwinetal.2006).
SyntacticallymarkedPP-Dscanbehighlyproductive(Ross1995;Grishmanetal.1998).Forexample,
bycombineswithavirtuallyunrestrictedarrayofcountablenouns(e.g., bybus/car/taxi/...)butlessreadily
withuncountablenouns(e.g.,∗byinformation/linguistics/... ).
Semantically, PP-Ds have a certain degree of semantic markedness on the noun (Haspelmath 1997;
Mimmelmann 1998; Stvan 1998; Bond 2005). For example, incombines with uncountable nouns that
refertoasocialinstitution(e.g., school,church,prison butnotinformation)toformsyntactically unmarked
PP-Ds with marked semantics, in the sense that only the social institution sense of the noun is evoked(e.g.,inschool/church/prison/... vs.
∗ininformation)(Baldwinetal.2006).
PP-Ds occur with surprising frequency and cause problems during parsing and generation, in terms
ofachievingtherightbalancebetweenover-andunder-generation(Baldwinetal.2004).
∗i.e.,reveal’ isa2-placepredicate,with xbindingtothesubject.

MultiwordExpressions 279
Institutionalized phrase Lexicalized phrase
Syntactically flexible Semi-fixed
Non-decomposable VNICs
Nominal MWEsVPCs
LVCs
Decomposable VNICsFixedMWE
FIGURE12.1 AclassiﬁcationofMWEs.
12.3.3.2 Complex Prepositions
Another common form of prepositional MWE is complex prepositions (e.g., on top of ,in addition to )
andotherforms of complex markers(VilladaMoirón 2005; Trawińskietal. 2006; Tsuchiyaetal. 2006).
Complex prepositions can take the form of ﬁxed MWEs (e.g., in addition to ) or alternatively semi-ﬁxed
MWEs,forexample,optionallyallowinginternalmodiﬁcation(e.g., with(due/particular/special/...)regard
to)ordeterminerinsertion(e.g., on(the)topof).
12.4 MWE Classiﬁcation
In developing a lexicon of MWEs, it is crucially important to develop a classiﬁcation that captures the
generalpropertiesofMWEclasses,butatthesametimeallowsfortheencodingofinformationparticular
to a given MWE instance. In this section, we present a commonly used high-level classiﬁcation, based
particularlyonthesyntacticandsemanticpropertiesofMWEsoutlinedinFigure12.1(Bauer1983; Sag
etal.2002).
TheclassiﬁcationofMWEsintolexicalizedphrasesandinstitutionalizedphraseshingesonwhetherthe
MWE is lexicalized (i.e.,explicitly encoded in the lexicon), or a simple collocation (i.e.,only statistically
idiomatic).
LexicalizedphrasesareMWEswithlexical,syntactic,semantic,orpragmaticidiomaticity.Lexicalized
phrasescanbefurthersplitinto:ﬁxedexpressions(e.g., adhoc,atﬁrst),semi-ﬁxedexpressions(e.g., spill
the beans ,car dealer ,Chicago White Socks ), and syntactically ﬂexible expressions (e.g., add up,give a
demo).
•ﬁxed expressions are ﬁxed strings that undergo neither morphosyntactic variation nor internal
modiﬁcation,oftenduetofossilizationofwhatwasonceacompositionalphrase.Forexample, by
andlarge isnotmorphosyntacticallymodiﬁable(e.g.,∗byandlarger )orinternallymodiﬁable(e.g.,
∗byandvery large).Non-modiﬁablePP-Dssuchas onairarealsoﬁxedexpressions.
•semi-ﬁxed expressions are lexically variable MWEs that have hard restrictions on word order
and composition, but undergo some degree of lexical variation such as inﬂection (e.g.,
kick/kicks/kicked/kicking the bucket vs.∗the bucket was kicked ), variation in reﬂexive pronouns
(e.g.,inher/his/their shoes),anddeterminerselection(e.g., TheBeatlesvs.a Beatlesalbum∗).Non-
decomposable VNICs (e.g., kick the bucket ,shoot the breeze ) and nominal MWEs (e.g., attorney
general,partofspeech )arealsoclassiﬁedassemi-ﬁxedexpressions.
∗The determiner theinThe Beatles is obligatory in the case that The Beatles forms a noun phrase (i.e., Beatlescan only be
quantiﬁedby the),butincaseswhere Beatlesformsa¯N,forexample,in[ NPa[N′[N′Beatles]album]],thelexicalitemis
realizedwithoutadeterminer.

280 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
•syntacticallyﬂexibleexpressionsareMWEsthatundergosyntacticvariation,suchasVPCs,LVCs,and decomposable VNICs. The nature of the ﬂexibility varies signiﬁcantly across constructiontypes. VPCs, for example, are syntactically ﬂexible with respect to the word order of the particleand NP in transitive usages: handin
the paper vs.handthe paper in . They are also usually
compatible with internal modiﬁcation, even for intransitive VPCs: the plane took right oﬀ. LVCs
(e.g.,give a demo) undergo full syntactic variation, including passivization (e.g., a demo was
given), extraction(e.g., how manydemos didhegive ?) andinternalmodiﬁcation(e.g., giveaclear
demo). Decomposable VNICs are also syntactically ﬂexible to some degree, although the exact
formofsyntacticvariationispredictedbythenatureoftheirsemanticdecomposability.
Note that many of our MWE construction types can be assigned to a unique sub category of lexicalizedphrase, namely, non-decomposable VNICs, NCs, VPCs, and LVCs. Determinerless PPs, on the otherhand,cutacrossallthreesubcategories:non-modiﬁablePP-Ds(e.g., atﬁrst)areﬁxedexpressions,PP-Ds
with strict constraints on modiﬁability (e.g., at level) are semi-ﬁxed expressions, and highly productive
PP-Ds(e.g., aspresident/coach/fatherofthebride/... )aresyntacticallyﬂexible.
TheclassofinstitutionalizedphrasescorrespondstoMWEsthatareexclusivelystatisticallyidiomatic,
asdescribedinSection12.2.4.Examplesinclude saltandpepper andmanythanks.
12.5 Research Issues
ThemajorNLPtasksrelatingtoMWEsare(1)identifyingandextractingMWEsfromcorpusdata, anddisambiguating their internal syntax, and (2) interpreting MWEs. Increasingly, these tasks are beingpipelined with parsers and applications such as MT (Venkatapathy and Joshi 2006; Zhang et al. 2006;Blunsom2007).
Depending on the type of MWE, the relative import of these syntactic and semantic tasks varies. For
example,withNCs,theidentiﬁcationandextractiontasksarerelativelytrivial,whereasinterpretationisconsiderablymorediﬃcult.Below,wediscussthechallengesandreviewthekeyresearchonMWEsinNLP.Foralistingofrelevantresources(especiallydatasetsandtoolkits),wereferthereadertothecompanionWebsite(http://handbookofnlp.cse.unsw.edu.au/?n_Chapter12.Chapter12 ).
12.5.1 Identiﬁcation
Identiﬁcation is the task of determining individual occurrences of MWEs in running text. The task is atthetoken(instance)level,suchthatwemayidentify50distinctoccurrencesof pickupinagivencorpus.
To give an example of an identiﬁcation task, given the corpus fragment in (4) (taken from “The FrogPrince,”achildren’sstory),wemightidentifytheMWEsin(4):
(4) One ﬁne evening a young princess puton
her bonnet and clogs, and wentout to takeawalk by
herselfinawood;...sherantopick itup;...
InMWEidentiﬁcation,akeychallengeisindiﬀerentiatingbetweenMWEsandliteralusagesforword
combinationssuchas makeaface thatcanoccurinbothusages( Kimmadeaface atthepoliceman [MWE]
vs.Kimmadeaface inpotteryclass [non-MWE]).Syntacticambiguityisalsoamajorconfoundingfactor,
forexample,inidentifyingVPCsincontextssuchas Havethepaperintoday .Forexample,inthesentence
Kim signed in the room , thereisambiguitybetweenaVPCinterpretation( sign in=“checkin/announce
arrival”)andanintransitiveverb+PPinterpretation(“Kimperformedtheactofsigningintheroom”).
MWEidentiﬁcationhastendedtotaketheformofcustomizedmethodsforparticularMWEconstruc-
tiontypesandlanguages(e.g.,EnglishVPCs,LVCs,andNVICs),buttherehavebeenattemptstodevelopgeneralizedtechniques,asoutlinedbelow.

MultiwordExpressions 281
PerhapsthemostobviousmethodofidentifyingMWEsisviaapart-of-speech(POS)tagger,chunker,
or parser, in the case that lexical information required to identify MWEs is contained within the parseroutput.Forexample,inthecaseofVPCs,thereisadedicatedtagfor(prepositional)particlesinthePennPOS tagset, such that VPC identiﬁcation can be performed simply by POS tagging a text, identifying allparticle tags, and further identifying the head verb associated with each particle (e.g., by looking left fortheﬁrstmainverb,withinawordwindowofﬁxedsize)(BaldwinandVillavicencio2002;Baldwin2005a).Similarly,achunkerorphrasestructureparsercanbeusedtoidentifyconstructionssuchasNCsorVPCs(Lapata and Lascarides 2003; McCarthy et al. 2003; Kim and Baldwin to appear). This style of approachis generally not able to distinguish MWE and literal usages of a given word combination, however, asthey are not diﬀerentiated in their surface syntax. Deep parsers that have lexical entries for MWEs anddisambiguate to the level of lexical items are able to make this distinction, however, via supertagging orfullparsing(Baldwinetal.2004;Blunsom2007).
AnothergeneralapproachtoMWEidentiﬁcationistotreatliteralandMWEusagesasdiﬀerentsenses
ofagivenwordcombination.ThisthenallowsfortheapplicationofWSDtechniquestotheidentiﬁcationproblem.AswithWSDresearch,bothsupervised(PatrickandFletcher2005;HashimotoandKawahara2008) and unsupervised (Birke and Sarkar 2006; Katz and Giesbrecht 2006; Sporleder and Li 2009)approacheshavebeenappliedtotheidentiﬁcationtask.Thekeyassumptioninunsupervisedapproacheshas been that literal usages will be contextually similar to simplex usages of the component words (e.g.,kickandbucketin the case of kick the bucket ). Mirroring the ﬁndings from WSD research, supervised
methods tend to be more accurate, but have the obvious drawback that they requires large numbers ofannotatedliteralandidiomaticinstancesofagivenMWEtowork.Unsupervisedtechniquesarethereforemoregenerallyapplicable.
A third approach, targeted particularly at semantically idiomatic MWEs, is to assume that MWEs
occur: (a) in canonical forms, or (b) only in particular syntactic conﬁgurations, and do not undergo thesamelevelofsyntacticvariationasliteralusages.ThisrelatestoourclaimsinSection12.3.2.4relatingtonon-decomposableVNICs,wherethepredictionisthatVNICssuchas kickthebucket willnotpassivize
orbeinternallymodiﬁable.IfwehaveamethodofidentifyingthelimitsofsyntacticvariabilityofagivenMWE,therefore,wecanassumethatanyusagethatfallsoutsidetheselimits(e.g., kickedabucket )must
be literal. The problem, then, is identifying the degree of syntactic variability of a given MWE. This canbe performed manually, in ﬂagging individual MWE lexical items with predictions of what variations agivenMWEcanundergo(Lietal.2003;Hashimotoetal.2006).Analternativethatalleviatesthemanualoverhead associated with hand annotation is to use unsupervised learning to predict the “canonical”conﬁgurations for a given MWE, which can optionally be complemented with a supervised model toidentify literal usages that are used in one of the canonical MWE conﬁgurations (e.g., Kim kicked the
bucketinfrustration,andstormedoutoftheroom)(Fazlyetal.2009).
In research to date, good results have been achieved for particular MWEs, especially English VPCs.
However, proposed methods have tended to rely heavily on existing resources such as parsers andhand-craftedlexicalresources,andbetunedtoparticularMWEtypes.
12.5.2 Extraction
MWEextractionisatype-leveltask, whereintheMWElexicalitemsattestedinapredeterminedcorpusare extracted out into a lexicon. For example, we may wish to know whether a given corpus providesevidenceforagivenverb takeandpreposition oﬀcombiningtoformaVPC(i.e., takeoﬀ).Toillustrate
the diﬀerence between identiﬁcation and extraction, identiﬁcation would involve the determination oftheindividualoccurrencesof takeoﬀ(e.g.,eachofthe240inagivencorpus),whereasextractionwould
involvethedecisionaboutwhether takeoﬀoccurredinthecorpusornot(irrespectiveofthenumberof
occurrences). Clearly there is a close connection between the two tasks, in thatif we have identiﬁed oneormoreoccurrencesofagivenMWEwecanextractitasaMWE,andconversely,ifwehaveextractedagivenMWE,wemustbeabletoidentifyatleastoneoccurrenceinthecorpus.

282 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
The motivation for MWE extraction is generally lexicon development and expansion, for example,
recognizingnewlyformedMWEs(e.g., ringtone orshockandawe )ordomain-speciﬁcMWEs.
Extracting MWEs is relevant to any lexically driven application, such as grammar engineering or
information extraction. Depending on the particular application, it may be necessary to additionallypredict lexical properties of a given MWE, for example, its syntactic or semantic class. In addition, itis particularly important for productive MWEs or domains that are rich in technical terms (e.g., bus
speedorboot upin the IT domain). MWE extraction is diﬃcult for many of the same reasons as MWE
identiﬁcation,namely,syntacticﬂexibilityandambiguity.
Therehasbeenastrongfocusonthedevelopmentofgeneral-purposetechniquesforMWEextraction,
particularly in the guise of collocation extraction (see Section 12.2.4). The dominating view here is thatextractioncanbecarriedoutviaassociationmeasuressuchaspointwisemutualinformationorthe t-test,
basedontheanalysisofthefrequencyofoccurrenceofagivenwordcombination,oftenincomparisonwiththefrequencyofoccurrenceofthecomponentwords(ChurchandHanks1989;Smadja1993;Frantzietal.2000;EvertandKrenn2001;Pecina2008).Associationmeasuresprovideascoreforeachwordcombina-tion,whichformsthebasisofarankingofMWEcandidates.Finalextraction,therefore,consistsofdeter-mininganappropriatecutoﬀintheranking,althoughevaluationisoftencarriedoutoverthefullranking.
Collocationextractiontechniqueshavebeenappliedtoawiderangeofextractiontasksoveranumber
oflanguages,withthegeneralﬁndingthatitisoftenunpredictablewhichassociationmeasurewillworkbestforagiventask.Asaresult,recentresearchhasfocusedonbuildingsupervisedclassiﬁerstocombinethe predictions of a number of association measures, and shown that this leads to consistently superiorresultsthananyoneassociationmeasure(Pecina2008).Ithasalsobeenshownthatthisstyleofapproachworks most eﬀectively when combined with POS tagging or parsing, and strict ﬁlters on the type ofMWE that is being extracted (e.g.,
ADJECTIVE –NOUNorVERB–NOUN: Justeson and Katz (1995, Pecina
(2008)). It is worth noting that association measures have generally been applied to (continuous) wordn-grams, or less frequently, predetermined dependency types in the output of a parser. Additionally,collocationalextractiontechniquestendtorequireareasonablenumberoftokenoccurrencesofagivenwordcombinationtooperatereliably,whichwecannotalwaysassume(Baldwin2005a;Fazly2007).
AsecondapproachtoMWEextraction,targetedspeciﬁcallyatsemanticallyandstatisticallyidiomatic
MWEs, is to extend the general association measure approach to include substitution (Lin 1999; Pearce2001;SchoneandJurafsky2001).Forexample,inassessingtheidiomaticityof redtape,explicitcomparison
ismadewithlexicallyrelatedcandidatesgeneratedbycomponentwordsubstitution,suchas yellowtape
orred strip. Common approaches to determining substitution candidates for a given component word
are(near-)synonymy—forexample,basedonresourcessuchasW
ORDNET—anddistributionalsimilarity.
Substitution can also be used to generate MWE candidates, and then check for their occurrence in
corpusdata.Forexample,if clearupisaknown(compositional)VPC,itisreasonabletoexpectthatVPCs
such asclean/tidy/unclutter/... up are also VPCs (Villavicencio 2005). That is not to say that all of these
occurasMWEs,however(c.f.∗unclutterup ),soanadditionalcheckforcorpusattestationisusuallyused
inthisstyleofapproach.
A third approach, also targeted at semantically idiomatic MWEs, is to analyze the relative similarity
betweenthecontextofuseofagivenwordcombinationanditscomponentwords(SchoneandJurafsky2001;Stevensonetal.2004;WiddowsandDorow2005).SimilartotheunsupervisedWSD-styleapproachto MWE identiﬁcation (see Section 12.5.1), the underlying hypothesis is that semantically idiomaticMWEs will occur in markedly diﬀerent lexical contexts to their component words. A bag of wordsrepresentation is commonly used to model the combined lexical context of all usages of a given wordor word combination. By interpreting this context model as a vector, it is possible to compare lexicalcontexts, for example, via simple cosine similarity (Widdows 2005). In order to reduce the eﬀects ofdata sparseness, dimensionality reduction is often carried out over the word space prior to comparison(Schütze1997).
The same approach has also been applied to extract LVCs, based on the assumption that the noun
complements in LVCs are often deverbal (e.g., bath, proposal, walk), and that the distribution of nouns

MultiwordExpressions 283
inPPspost-modifyingnouncomplementsingenuineLVCs(e.g., (makea)proposalofmarriage )willbe
similartothatoftheobjectoftheunderlyingverb(e.g., proposemarriage )(GrefenstetteandTeufel1995).
Here,therefore,theassumptionisthatLVCswillbedistributionally similartothebaseverbformofthe
noun complement, whereas with the original extraction method, the assumption was that semanticallyidiomaticMWEsare dissimilar totheircomponentwords.
A fourth approach is to perform extraction on the basis of implicit identiﬁcation. That is, (possibly
noisy) token-level statistics can be fed into a type-level classiﬁer to predict whether there have beengenuine instances of a given MWE in the corpus. An example of this style of approach is to use POStaggers,chunkers,andparserstoidentifyEnglishVPCsindiﬀerentsyntacticconﬁgurations,andfeedthepredictionsofthevariouspreprocessorsintotheﬁnalextractionclassiﬁer(Baldwin2005a).Alternatively,a parser can be used to identify PPs with singular nouns, and semantically idiomatic PP-Ds extractedfrom among them based on distributional (dis)similarity of occurrences with and without determinersacrossarangeofprepositions(vanderBeek2005).
A ﬁfth approach is to use syntactic ﬁxedness as a means of extracting MWEs, based on the assump-
tion that semantically idiomatic MWEs undergo syntactic variation (e.g., passivization or internalmodiﬁcation)lessreadilythansimpleverb–nouncombinations(Bannard2007;Fazlyetal.2009).
Inadditiontogeneral-purposeextractiontechniques,linguisticpropertiesofparticularMWEconstruc-
tiontypeshavebeenusedinextraction.Forexample,thefactthatagivenverb–prepositioncombinationoccurs as a noun (e.g., takeoﬀ, clip-on) is a strong predictor of the fact that combination occurring as a
VPC(Baldwin2005a).
OnebottleneckinMWEextractionisthetokenfrequencyoftheMWEcandidate.Withafewnotable
exceptions (e.g., (Baldwin 2005a; Fazly et al. 2009)), MWE research has tended to ignore low-frequencyMWEs, for example, by applying a method only to word combinations that occur at least Ntimes in a
corpus.
12.5.3 Internal Syntactic Disambiguation
As part of the process of MWE identiﬁcation and extraction, for some MWE types it is necessary todisambiguate the internal syntax of individual MWEs. A prominent case of this in English is NCs withthreeormoreterms.Forexample, glasswindowcleaner hastwopossibleinterpretations,
∗corresponding
to the two possible bracketings of the compound: (1) “a cleaner of glass windows” (= [[glass window]
cleaner]), and (2) “a cleaner of windows, made of glass” (= [glass [window cleaner]].I nt h i sc a s e ,t h e
ﬁrst case (of left bracketing) is the correct analysis, but movie car chase , for example, is right bracketing
(=(movie(carchase))).TheprocessofdisambiguatingthesyntaxofanNCiscalledbracketing.
The most common approach to bracketing is based on the statistical analysis of the components of
competing analyses. In the adjacency model, for a ternary NC, N1 N2 N3, a comparison is made of the
frequenciesofthetwomodiﬁer–headpairingsextractedfromthetwoanalyses,namely, N1N2andN1N3
intheleftbracketingcase,and N2N3andN1N3intherightbracketingcase;as N1N3iscommontoboth,
inpractice, N1N2iscompareddirectlywith N2N3.Aleftbracketinganalysisisselectedinthecasethat
N1N2isjudgedtobemorelikely,otherwisearightbracketinganalysisisselected(Marcus1980).Inthe
dependencymodel,theNCisinsteaddecomposedintothedependencytuplesof N1N2andN2N3inthe
caseofleftbracketing,and N2N3andN1N3inthecaseofrightbracketing;onceagain,thedependency
N2 N3is common to both, and can be ignored. In the instance that N1 N2is more likely than N1 N3,
themodelprefersaleftbracketinganalysis,otherwisearightbracketinganalysisisselected(Lauer1995).Whilethedependencymodeltendstooutperformtheadjacencymodel,thebest-performingmodelstakefeatures derived from both along with various syntactic and semantic features (Nakov and Hearst 2005;VadasandCurran2008).
∗Moregenerally,foran nitemNC,thenumberofpossibleinterpretationsisdeﬁnedbytheCatalannumber Cn=1
n+1(2n
n)
.

284 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
12.5.4 MWE Interpretation
ThesemanticinterpretationofMWEsisusuallyperformedinoneoftwoways:(1)relativetoageneralizedsemanticinventory(compatiblewithbothsimplexwordsandMWEs,suchasW
ORDNET);and(2)based
onasetofsemanticrelationscapturingsemanticinterplaybetweencomponentwords.WheninterpretingVPCsorlexicalizedPP-Ds,forexample,theformerapproachwouldbemoreappropriate(e.g.,tocapturethe fact that bow outis synonymous with withdraw , both of which are troponyms of retire). Nominal
MWEs and productive PP-Ds, on the other hand, are more amenable to interpretation by semanticrelations (e.g., to capture the semantics of apple pie in terms of the
MAKErelation, as in “pie made from
apple(s)”).
OnecommonapproachtoMWEinterpretationisviacomponentsimilarity,thatis,thecomparisonof
the components of a MWE with corresponding components of annotated MWEs, or alternatively withsimplex words. For example, a novel NC can be interpreted by identifying training NCs with similarmodiﬁer and head nouns (e.g., in interpreting grape extract ,grapewould be compared with similar
modiﬁers,and extractwithsimilarheads),asdeterminedrelativetoalexicalresourceorviadistributional
similarity.WecanthenextrapolatefromthecloselymatchingtrainingNCstopredicttheinterpretationof the novel NC (Vanderwende 1994; Moldovan et al. 2004; Kim and Baldwin 2005; Nastase et al.2006; Kim and Baldwin 2007b; Ó Séaghdha 2008). Alternatively, we may employ contextual similaritytocompareaVPCwithitssimplexverb,todetermineiftheyaresuﬃcientlysimilarthattheVPCcanbeinterpretedcompositionallyfromtheverb(Baldwinetal.2003;McCarthyetal.2003;CookandStevenson2006).
Crosslinguistic evidence can also provide valuable evidence when interpreting MWEs. For example,
the analysis of what preposition is used in diﬀerent Romance languages to translate a given EnglishMWEcanprovidevaluableinsightsintotherangeofpossibleinterpretationsfortheEnglishMWE(Girju2009).Conversely,semanticallyidiomaticMWEscanbedetectedfromparallelcorpusdatabyidentifyingtranslationdivergencesinthecomponentwordslexicalchoice(Melamed1997).Forexample,knowledgethatbalanceandsheetare most often translated as équilibreandfeuille, respectively, in French, and yet
balancesheet istranslatedas bilansuggeststhat balancesheet issemanticallyidiomatic.
One popular approach to determining the underlying semantic relation associated with a MWE is to
identifysurfacerealizationsorparaphrasesassociatedwitheachsemanticclass(Lapata2002;Groveretal.2004; Kim and Baldwin 2006; Nicholson and Baldwin 2006; Nakov and Hearst 2008). For example, inthe case of compound nominalizations, there are the two primary classes of
SUBJECTandOBJECT,b a s e d
onwhetherthemodiﬁeractsasthesubject(e.g., investorhesitation =“investorhesitates”)orobject(e.g.,
product replacement = “replace (the) product”) of the base verb form of the deverbal head. For a given
compound nominalization and base verb form, it is possible to analyze the relative occurrence of themodiﬁerassubjectorobjectofthebaseverb,andselecttheinterpretationthatismostcommonlyobserved(Lapata2002;Groveretal.2004;NicholsonandBaldwin2006).
Another methodology that has been applied to the interpretation task with success is the analysis
of the co-occurrence properties of the MWE components. For example, the semantics of particles inVPCs can be interpreted by analyzing what types of verbs can combine with a given particle (Cook andStevenson2006;KimandBaldwin2007a).Similarly,Japanesecompoundverbs(V-Vcombinations)canbe interpreted by observing what set of verbs each of the component verbs combines with to form acompoundverb,optionallyincludingthesemanticclassoftheresultingcompoundverb(Uchiyamaetal.2005).
Oneoverarchingassumptionmadeinmostsemanticinterpretationtasksisthatitispossibletoarrive
at a compositional interpretation for each MWE via its component words. Ideally, we of course need toidentifyinstancesofsemanticidiomaticity, motivatingtheneedformethodsthatcanmodeltherelativecompositionality or decomposability of MWEs (Lin 1999; Baldwin et al. 2003; McCarthy et al. 2003;McCarthyetal.2007).

MultiwordExpressions 285
While there has been a healthy interest in MWE interpretation, research has suﬀered from a lack of
agreement on semantic inventories, and the relative unavailability of annotated data. One very positivesteptowardredressingthissituationwasasharedtaskatSemEval-2007,oninterpretingnominalMWEsinEnglish(Girjuetal.2007),andanupcomingSemEval-2010taskonthemulti-wayclassiﬁcationofsemanticrelations between pairs of nominals. In practice, the SemEval-2007 task took a pair of nouns in a ﬁxedsententialcontextandattemptedtodetermineiftheywereinterpretableusingasetofsemanticrelationscompatiblewithNCs.Assuch,thetaskwasnotspeciﬁcallyonNCinterpretation,butNCinterpretationmethodscouldbeevaluatedoverthedataset(KimandBaldwin2008;ÓSéaghdha2008).Crucially,thetaskorganizers chose to sidestep the controversy surrounding the precise membership of a broad-coverageset of semantic relations, and instead focused on relations where there is relatively high agreementbetween researchers. They additionally defused the question of interpretational overlap/ambiguity of agiven nominal, by designing the task as a series of binary subtasks, where a prediction had to be madeabout each nominal’s compatibility with a given semantic relation (ignoring whether or not it was alsocompatiblewithotherrelations).
12.6 Summary
MWEsareanintegralpartoflanguage:vastinnumberandhighlyvariedinnature.Theyaredeﬁnedbyidiomaticityatthelexical, syntactic, semantic, pragmatic, andstatisticallevels, and occur in amyriad ofdiﬀerentconstructionsintheworld’slanguages.InadditiontoprovidingabriefforayintothelinguisticcomplexitiesofMWEs,wehavedetailedthekeyMWEsinMWEresearch,andoutlinedvariousapproachesto the primary computational challenges associated with MWEs, namely, identiﬁcation, extraction, andinterpretation.
We have deliberately not provided a survey of MWE resources in this paper, choosing instead to
maintainanup-to-the-momentsnapshotoftheﬁeldonthehandbook’scompanionWebsite. ForthoseinterestedinpursuingMWEresearch, werecommendthisasyourﬁrstportofcall. Forreaderswhoareinterested in further reading on MWEs, we particularly recommend the following works: (Moon 1998;McKeownandRadev2000;Cowie2001;Sagetal.2002;Villavicencioetal.2005).
Acknowledgments
ThechapterbeneﬁttedfromdetailedreviewsbyFrancisBond,DiarmuidÓSéaghdha,DianaMcCarthy,PaulCook,AlineVillavicencio,andRoxanaGirju.
References
Abeillé, A. (1988). Light verb constructions and extraction out of NP in a tree adjoining grammar. In
Papersofthe24thRegionalMeetingoftheChicagoLinguisticsSociety,Chicago,IL.
Ahn, H.-D. (1991). Light verbs, VP-movement, negation and clausal structure in Korean and English.
PhDthesis,UniversityofWisconsin-Madison,Madison,WI.
Aronoﬀ,M.(1976). WordFormationinGenerativeGrammar.Cambridge,MA:MITPress.
Baldwin,T.(2005a).ThedeeplexicalacquisitionofEnglishverb-particles. ComputerSpeechandLanguage,
SpecialIssueonMultiwordExpressions19 (4),398–414.
Baldwin, T. (2005b). Looking for prepositional verbs in corpus data. In Proceedings of the Second ACL-
SIGSEM Workshop on the Linguistic Dimensions of Prepositions and their Use in ComputationalLinguisticsFormalismsandApplications ,Colchester,U.K.,pp.115–126.

286 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
Baldwin,T.andF.Bond(2002).Multiwordexpressions:SomeproblemsforJapaneseNLP.In Proceedings
oftheEighthAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationforNaturalLanguageProcessing(Japan),Keihanna,Japan,pp.379–382.
Baldwin, T.andA.Villavicencio(2002). Extractingtheunextractable: Acasestudyonverb-particles. In
Proceedings of the Sixth Conference on Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-2002) , Taipei, Taiwan,
pp.98–104.
Baldwin,T.,C.Bannard,T.Tanaka,andD.Widdows(2003).Anempiricalmodelofmultiwordexpression
decomposability. In Proceedings of the ACL-2003 Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Analysis,
AcquisitionandTreatment,Sapporo,Japan,pp.89–96.
Baldwin,T.,E.M.Bender,D.Flickinger,A.Kim,andS.Oepen(2004).Road-testingtheEnglishResource
Grammar over the British National Corpus. In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference
onLanguageResourcesandEvaluation(LREC2004),Lisbon,Portugal,pp.2047–2050.
Baldwin, T., J. Beavers, L. Van Der Beek, F. Bond, D. Flickinger, and I. A. Sag (2006). In search of
a systematic treatment of determinerless PPs. In P. Saint-Dizier (Ed.), Syntax and Semantics of
Prepositions.Dordrecht,theNetherlands:Springer.
Bannard,C.(2007).Ameasureofsyntacticﬂexibilityforautomaticallyidentifyingmultiwordexpressions
in corpora. In Proceedings of the ACL-2007 Workshop on A Broader Perspective on Multiword
Expressions,Prague,CzechRepublic,pp.1–8.
Bannard, C., T. Baldwin, and A. Lascarides (2003). A statistical approach to the semantics of verb-
particles.In ProceedingsoftheACL2003WorkshoponMultiwordExpressions:Analysis,Acquisition
andTreatment,Sapporo,Japan,pp.65–72.
Barker, K. and S. Szpakowicz (1998). Semi-automatic recognition of noun modiﬁer relationships. In
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING-1998) ,
Montreal,Canada,pp.96–102.
Bauer,L.(1983). EnglishWord-Formation.Cambridge,U.K.:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Bauer, L. (2001). Compounding. In M. Haspelmath (Ed.), Language Typology and Language Universals .
TheHague,theNetherlands:MoutondeGruyter.
Benor, S. B. and R. Levy (2006). The chicken or the egg? A probabilistic analysis of English binomials.
Language82 (2),233–278.
Benson, M. (1990). Collocations and general-purpose dictionaries. International Journal of Lexicogra-
phy3(1),23–35.
Birke, J. and A. Sarkar (2006). A clustering approach for the nearly unsupervised recoginition of non-
literal language. In Proceedings of the 11th Conference of the EACL (EACL 2006) , Trento, Italy,
pp.329–336.
Blunsom, P. (2007). Structured classiﬁcation for multilingual natural language processing. PhD thesis,
UniversityofMelbourne,Melbourne,Australia.
Bolinger,D.(1976). ThePhrasalVerbinEnglish.Boston,MA:HarvardUniversityPress.
Bond, F. (2005). Translating the Untranslatable: A Solution to the Problem of Generating English
Determiners.CSLIStudiesinComputationalLinguistics.CSLIPublications,Stanford,CA.
Booij, G.(2002). SeparablecomplexverbsinDutch: Acaseofperiphrasticwordformation. InN.Dehé,
R. Jackendoﬀ, A. McIntyre, and S. Urban (Eds.), Verb-Particle Explorations , pp. 21–41. Berlin,
Germany/NewYork:MoutondeGruyter.
Brinton,L.(1985).VerbparticlesinEnglish:Aspectoraktionsart. StudiaLinguistica39,157–168.
Butt, M. (2003). The light verb jungle. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Multi-Verb Constructions ,
Trondheim,Norway,pp.1–49.
Calzolari,N.,C.Fillmore,R.Grishman,N.Ide,A.Lenci,C.MacLeod,andA.Zampolli(2002).Towards
best practice for multiword expressions in computational lexicons. In Proceedings of the Third
InternationalConferenceonLanguageResourcesandEvaluation(LREC2002) ,LasPalmas,Canary
Islands,pp.1934–1940.
Chafe, W. L. (1968). Idiomaticity as an anomaly in the Chomskyan paradigm. Foundations of Language
4,109–127.

MultiwordExpressions 287
Chander,I.(1998).Automatedposteditingofdocuments.PhDthesis,UniversityofSouthernCalifornia,
LosAngeles,CA.
Choueka,Y.(1988).Lookingforneedlesinahaystackorlocatinginterestingcollocationalexpressionsin
largetextualdatabases.In ProceedingsofRIAO,Cambridge,MA,pp.609–623.
Church,K.W.andP.Hanks(1989).Wordassociationnorms,mutualinformationandlexicography.In
Proceedingsofthe27thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationofComputationalLinguistics(ACL-1989) ,
Vancouver,Canada,pp.76–83.
Cook, P. and S. Stevenson (2006). Classifying particle semantics in English verb-particle constructions.
InProceedings of the ACL-2006 Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Identifying and Exploiting
UnderlyingProperties ,Sydney,Australia,pp.45–53.
Copestake,A.andA.Lascarides(1997).Integratingsymbolicandstatisticalrepresentations:Thelexicon
pragmaticsinterface.In Proceedingsofthe35thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationofComputational
Linguisticsand8thConferenceoftheEuropeanChapterofAssociationofComputationalLinguistics(ACL/EACL-1997),Madrid,Spain,pp.136–143.
Cowie,A.(Ed.)(2001). Phraseology:Theory,Analysis,andApplications.Oxford,U.K.:OxfordUniversity
Press.
Cowie, A. P. and P. A. Howarth (1996). Phraseology—A select bibliography. International Journal of
Lexicography9 (1),38–51.
Cruse,A.D.(1986). LexicalSemantics .Cambridge,U.K.:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Dirven, R. (2001). The metaphoric in recent cognitive approaches to English phrasal verbs.
metaphorik.de1 ,39–54.
Downing,P.(1977).OnthecreationanduseofEnglishcompoundnouns. Language53 (4),810–842.
Evert,S.(2004).Thestatisticsofwordcooccurrences:Wordpairsandcollocations.PhDthesis,University
ofStuttgart,Stuttgart,Germany.
Evert, S. and B. Krenn (2001). Methods for the qualitative evaluation of lexical association measures. In
Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the ACL and 10th Conference of the EACL (ACL-EACL2001),Toulouse,France,pp.188–195.
Fazly, A. (2007). Automatic acquisition of lexical knowledge about multiword predicates. PhD thesis,
UniversityofToronto,Toronto,Canada.
Fazly, A., P. Cook, and S. Stevenson (2009). Unsupervised type and token identiﬁcation of idiomatic
expressions. ComputationalLinguistics35(1),61–103.
Fellbaum,C.(Ed.)(1998). WordNet,AnElectronicLexicalDatabase .Cambridge,MA:MITPress.
Fellbaum,C.(2002).VPidiomsinthelexicon:Topicsforresearchusingaverylargecorpus.In Proceedings
oftheKONVENS2002Conference ,Saarbrücken,Germany.
Fernando, C. and R. Flavell (1981). On idiom: Critical views and perspectives. Exeter Linguistic Studies;
Exeter,U.K.:UniversityofExeter.
Fillmore, C., P. Kay, and M. C. O’Connor (1988). Regularity and idiomaticity in grammatical
constructions. Language64 ,501–538.
Frantzi, K., S. Ananiadou, and H. Mima (2000). Automatic recognition of multi-word terms: The
C-value/NC-valuemethod. InternationalJournalonDigitalLibraries3 (2),115–130.
Gagné,C.L.,T.L.Spalding,andM.C.Gorrie(2005).Sententialcontextandtheinterpretationoffamiliar
open-compoundsandnovelmodiﬁer-nounphrases. LanguageandSpeech28 (2),203–221.
Gates, E. (1988). The Treatment of Multiword Lexemes in Some Current Dictionaries of English .I n
ProceedingsofZuriLEx’86,Tübingen,Germany,pp.99–106.
Gerber, L. and J. Yang (1997). Systran MT dictionary development. In Proceedings of the Sixth Machine
TranslationSummit(MTSummitVI),SanDiego,CA.
Gibbs, R. W. (1980). Spilling the beans on understanding and memory for idioms in conversation.
MemoryandCognition8 (2),149–156.
Girju, R. (2009). The syntax and semantics of prepositions in the task of automatic interpretation
of nominal phrases and compounds: A cross-linguistic study. Computational Linguistics 35(2),
185–228.

288 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
Girju, R., P. Nakov, V. Nastase, S. Szpakowicz, P. Turney, and D. Yuret (2007). Semeval-2007 task 04:
Classiﬁcation of semantic relations between nominals. In Proceedings of the Fourth International
WorkshoponSemanticEvaluations,Prague,CzechRepublic,pp.13–18.
Grefenstette,G.andP.Tapanainen(1994).Whatisaword,whatisasentence?problemsoftokenization.
InProceedingsoftheThirdConferenceonComputationalLexicographyandTextResearch ,Budapest,
Hungary,pp.79–87.
Grefenstette,G.andS.Teufel(1995).Acorpus-basedmethodforautomaticidentiﬁcationofsupportverbs
fornominalizations.In ProceedingsoftheSeventhEuropeanChapterofAssociationofComputational
Linguistics(EACL-1995) ,Dublin,Ireland,pp.98–103.
Grimshaw,J.andA.Mester(1988).Lightverbsand theta-marking. LinguisticInquiry19 (2),205–232.
Grishman, R., C. Macleod, and A. Myers (1998). COMLEX Syntax Reference Manual, Proteus Project,
NewYorkUniversity,NewYork.
Grover,C.,M.Lapata,andA.Lascarides(2004).Acomparisonofparsingtechnologiesforthebiomedical
domain.JournalofNaturalLanguageEngineering 1(1),1–38.
Hashimoto, C. and D. Kawahara (2008). Construction of an idiom corpus and its application to idiom
identiﬁcation based on WSD incorporating idiom-speciﬁc features. In Proceedings of the 2008
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2008) , Honolulu, HI,
pp.992–1001.
Hashimoto,C.,S.Sato,andT.Utsuro(2006).Japaneseidiomrecognition:Drawingalinebetweenliteral
andidiomaticmeanings.In ProceedingsoftheCOLING/ACL2006InteractivePosterSession ,Sydney,
Australia,pp.353–360.
Haspelmath, M. (1997). From Space to Time in The World’s Languages . Munich, Germany: Lincorn
Europa.
Hoshi,H.(1994).Passive,causive,andlightverbs:Astudyofthetaroleassignment.PhDthesis,University
ofConnecticut,Storrs,CT.
Huddleston,R.andG.K.Pullum(2002). TheCambridgeGrammaroftheEnglishLanguage .Cambridge,
U.K.:CambridgeUniversityPress.
Jackendoﬀ, R. (1973). The base rules for prepositional phrases. In A Festschrift for Morris Halle , pp.
345–356.NewYork:Rinehart&Winston.
Jackendoﬀ,R.(1997). TheArchitectureoftheLanguageFaculty .Cambridge,MA:MITPress.
Jackendoﬀ,R.(2002). FoundationsofLanguage.Oxford,U.K.:OxfordUniversityPress.
Jespersen,O.(1965). AModernEnglishGrammaronHistoricalPrinciples,PartVI,Morphology .London,
U.K.:GeorgeAllenandUnwinLtd.
Justeson,J.S.andS.M.Katz(1995).Technicalterminology:Somelinguisticpropertiesandanalgorithm
foridentiﬁcationintext. NaturalLanguageEngineering 1(1),9–27.
Kaalep, H.-J. and K. Muischnek (2008). Multi-word verbs of Estonian: A database and a corpus. In
ProceedingsoftheLREC2008Workshop:TowardsaSharedTaskforMultiwordExpressions(MWE2008),Marrakech,Morocco,pp.23–26.
Kageura,K.,B.Daille,H.Nakagawa,andL.-F.Chien(2004).Recenttrendsincomputationalterminology.
Terminology10(1),1–21.
Karimi-Doostan, G. H. (1997). Light verb construction in persian. PhD thesis, University of Essex,
Colchester,U.K.
Kastovsky,D.(1982). WortbildungundSemantik .Dusseldorf,Germany:Bagel/Francke.
Katz,G.andE.Giesbrecht(2006).Automaticidentiﬁcationofnon-compositionalmulti-wordexpressions
usinglatentsemanticanalysis.In ProceedingsoftheACL-2006WorkshoponMultiwordExpressions:
IdentifyingandExploitingUnderlyingProperties ,Sydney,Australia,pp.28–35.
Katz, J. J. and P. M. Postal (2004). Semantic interpretation of idioms and sentences containing them. In
Quarterly Progress Report (70), MIT Research Laboratory of Electronics , pp. 275–282. MIT Press,
Cambridge,MA.

MultiwordExpressions 289
Keysar, B. and B. Bly (1995). Intuitions of the transparency of idioms: Can one keep a secret by spilling
thebeans? JournalofMemoryandLanguage34(1),89–109.
Kim, S. N. and T. Baldwin (2005). Automatic interpretation of compound nouns using WordNet simi-
larity. In Proceedings of the Second International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(IJCNLP-05),Jeju,Korea,pp.945–956.
Kim,S.N.andT.Baldwin(2006).Interpretingsemanticrelationsinnouncompoundsviaverbsemantics.
InProceedingsoftheCOLING/ACL2006InteractivePosterSession ,Sydney,Australia,pp.491–498.
Kim, S. N. and T. Baldwin (2007a). Detecting compositionality of English verb-particle constructions
usingsemanticsimilarity.In ProceedingsofConferenceofthePaciﬁcAssociationforComputational
Linguistics ,Melbourne,Australia,pp.40–48.
Kim, S. N. and T. Baldwin (2007b). Disambiguating noun compounds. In Proceedings of 22nd AAAI
ConferenceonArtiﬁcialIntelligence,Vancouver,Canada,pp.901–906.
Kim,S.N.andT.Baldwin(2008).Benchmarkingnouncompoundinterpretation.In ProceedingsofThird
International Joint Conference on Natual Language Processing (IJCNLP-2008) , Hyderabad, India,
pp.569–576.
Kim, S. N. and T. Baldwin (to appear). How to pick out token instances of English verb-particle
constructions. LanguageResourcesandEvaluation .
Lapata,M.(2002).Thedisambiguationofnominalizations. ComputationalLinguistics28(3),357–388.
Lapata, M. and A. Lascarides (2003). Detecting novel compounds: The role of distributional evidence.
InProceedingsofthe11thConferenceoftheEuropeanChapterfortheAssociationofComputational
Linguistics(EACL-2003) ,Budapest,Hungary,pp.235–242.
Lauer,M.(1995).Designingstatisticallanguagelearners:Experimentsonnouncompounds.PhDthesis,
MacquarieUniversity,Sydney,Australia.
Levi,J.(1978). TheSyntaxandSemanticsofComplexNominals .NewYork:AcademicPress.
Li, W., X. Zhang, C. Niu, Y. Jiang, and R. K. Srihari (2003). An expert lexicon approach to identifying
Englishphrasalverbs.In ProceedingsoftheACL2003WorkshoponMultiwordExpressions:analysis,
acquisitionandtreatment,Sapporo,Japan,pp.513–520.
Liberman, M. and R. Sproat (1992). The stress and structure of modiﬁed noun phrases in English. In
I. A. Sag and A. Szabolcsi (Eds.), Lexical Matters—CSLI Lecture Notes No. 24. Stanford, CA: CSLI
Publications.
Lidner, S. (1983). A lexico-semantic analysis of English verb particle constructions with OUT and UP.
PhDthesis,UniversityofIndianaatBloomington,Bloomington,IN.
Lieber, R. and P. Štekauer (Eds.) (2009). The Oxford Handbook of Compounding . Oxford, U.K.: Oxford
UniversityPress.
Lin, D. (1998). Extracting collocations from text corpora. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on
ComputationalTerminology,Montreal,Canada.
Lin,D.(1999).Automaticidentiﬁcationofnon-compositionalphrases.In Proceedingsofthe37thAnnual
MeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics ,CollegePark,MD,pp.317–324.
Lüdeling, A. (2001). On Particle Verbs and Similar Constructions in German. Stanford, CA: CSLI
Publications.
Marcus,M.(1980). ATheoryofSyntacticRecognitionforNaturalLanguage .Cambridge,MA:MITPress.
Matsuo, Y., S. Shirai, A. Yokoo, and S. Ikehara (1997). Direct parse tree translation in cooperation with
the transfer method. In D. Joneas and H. Somers (Eds.), New Methods in Language Processing ,
pp.229–238.London,U.K.:UCLPress.
McCarthy, D., B. Keller, and J. Carroll (2003). Detecting a continuum of compositionality in phrasal
verbs. In Proceedings of the ACL2003 Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Analysis, Acquisition
andTreatment,Sapporo,Japan,pp.73–80.
McCarthy,D.,S.Venkatapathy,andA.Joshi(2007).Detectingcompositionalityofverb-objectcombina-
tionsusingselectionalpreferences.In Proceedingsofthe2007JointConferenceonEmpiricalMethods

290 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
inNaturalLanguageProcessingandComputationalNaturalLanguageLearning(EMNLP-CoNLL) ,
Prague,CzechRepublic,pp.369–379.
McIntyre, A. (2007). Particle verbs and argument structure. Language and Linguistics Compass 1 (4),
350–367.
McKeown, K. R. and D. R. Radev (2000). Collocations. In R. Dale, H. Moisl, and H. Somers (Eds.), A
HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing,Chapter15.NewYork:MarcelDekker.
Melamed, I. D. (1997). Automatic discovery of non-compositional compounds in parallel data. In
ProceedingsoftheSecondConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing(EMNLP-97),Providence,RI,pp.97–108.
Mel’čuk,I.A.andA.Polguère(1987).AformallexiconintheMeaning-TextTheory(orhowtodolexica
withwords). ComputationalLinguistics13(3–4),261–275.
Mimmelmann, N. P. (1998). Regularity in irregularity: Article use in adpositional phrases. Linguistic
Typology2,315–353.
Miyagawa,S.(1989).Lightverbsandtheergativehypothesis. LinguisticInquiry20 ,659–668.
Miyazaki,M.,S.Ikehara,andA.Yokoo(1993).Combinedwordretrievalforbilingualdictionarybasedon
the analysis of compound word. Transactions of the Information Processing Society of Japan 34 (4),
743–754.(inJapanese).
Mohanan,T.(1994). ArgumentStructureinHindi.Stanford,CA:CSLIPublications.
Moldovan, D., A. Badulescu, M. Tatu, D. Antohe, and R. Girju (2004). Models for the semantic classiﬁ-
cationofnounphrases.In ProceedingsofHLT-NAACL2004: WorkshoponComputationalLexical
Semantics,Boston,CA,pp.60–67.
Moon, R. E. (1998). Fixed Expressions and Idioms in English: A Corpus-Based Approach. Oxford, U.K.:
OxfordUniversityPress.
Nakov,P.(2008).Nouncompoundinterpretationusingparaphrasingverbs:Feasibilitystudy.In Proceed-
ingsofthe13thInternationalConferenceonArtiﬁcialIntelligence:Methodology,Systems,Applications(AIMSA’08),Varna,Bulgaria,pp.103–117.
Nakov, P. and M. Hearst (2005). Search engine statistics beyond the n-gram: Application to noun
compoundbracketting.In ProceedingsoftheNinthConferenceonComputationalNaturalLanguage
Learning(CoNLL-2005),AnnArbor,MI,pp.17–24.
Nakov, P. and M. A. Hearst (2008). Solving relational similarity problems using the web as a corpus. In
Proceedingsofthe46thAnnualMeetingoftheACL:HLT ,Columbus,OH,pp.452–460.
Nastase,V.,J.Sayyad-Shirabad,M.Sokolova,andS.Szpakowicz(2006).Learningnoun-modiﬁersemantic
relations with corpus-based and WordNet-based features. In Proceedings of the 21st National
ConferenceonArtiﬁcialIntelligence(AAAI) ,Boston,MA,pp.781–787.
Nicholson,J.andT.Baldwin(2006).Interpretationofcompoundnominalisationsusingcorpusandweb
statistics.In ProceedingsoftheCOLING/ACL2006WorkshoponMultiwordExpressions:Identifying
andExploitingUnderlyingProperties ,Sydney,Australia,pp.54–61.
Nunberg,G.,I.A.Sag,andT.Wasow(1994).Idioms. Language70 ,491–538.
O’Dowd,E.M.(1998). PrepositionsandParticlesinEnglish .Oxford,U.K.:OxfordUniversityPress.
Ó Séaghdha, D. (2008). Learning compound noun semantics. PhD thesis, Computer Laboratory,
UniversityofCambridge,SantaBarbara,CA.
Osswald, R., H. Helbig, and S. Hartrumpf (2006). The representation of German prepositional verbs
in a semantically based computer lexicon. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on
LanguageResourcesandEvaluation(LREC2006),Genoa,Italy.
Patrick,J.andJ.Fletcher(2005).Classifyingverbparticleconstructionsbyverbarguments.In Proceedings
oftheSecondACL-SIGSEMWorkshopontheLinguisticDimensionsofPrepositionsandtheirUseinComputationalLinguisticsFormalismsandApplications ,Colchester,U.K.,pp.200–209.
Pauwels,P.(2000). Put,Set,Lay,andPlace:ACognitveLinguisticApproachtoVerbalMeaning .Munich,
Germany:LincomEuropa.

MultiwordExpressions 291
Pearce, D. (2001). Synonymy in collocation extraction. In Proceedings of the NAACL 2001 Workshop
onWordNetandOtherLexicalResources:Applications,ExtensionsandCustomizations ,Pittsburgh,
PA,pp.41–46.
Pecina,P.(2008).Lexicalassociationmeasures.PhDthesis,CharlesUniversity,Prague,CzechRepublic.Piao,S.,P.Rayson,D.Archer,A.Wilson,andT.McEnery(2003).Extractingmultiwordexpressionswith
a semantic tagger. In Proceedings of the ACL2003 Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Analysis,
AcquisitionandTreatment,Sapporo,Japan,pp.49–56.
Quirk, R., S. Greenbaum, G. Leech, and J. Svartvik (1985). A Comprehensive Grammar of the English
Language.London,U.K.:Longman.
Riehemann, S. (2001). A constructional approach to idioms and word formation. PhD thesis, Stanford
University,Stanford,CA.
Rosario, B. and M. Hearst (2001). Classifying the semantic relations in noun compounds via a domain-
speciﬁc lexical hierarchy. In Proceedings of the Sixth Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
LanguageProcessing(EMNLP-2001) ,Pittsburgh,PA,pp.82–90.
Ross,H.(1995).Defectivenounphrases.In Papersofthe31stRegionalMeetingoftheChicagoLinguistics
Society,Chicago,IL,pp.398–440.
Sag,I.A.,T.Baldwin,F.Bond,A.Copestake,andD.Flickinger(2002).Multiwordexpressions:Apainin
theneckforNLP.In ProceedingsoftheThirdInternationalConferenceonIntelligentTextProcessing
andComputationalLinguistics(CICLing-2002) ,MexicoCity,Mexico,pp.1–15.
Sager, J. C. (1990). A Practical Course in Terminology Processing . Amsterdam, the Netherlands/
Philadelphia,PA:JohnBenjamins.
Schone,P.andD.Jurafsky(2001).Isknowledge-freeinductionofmultiwordunitdictionaryheadwords
asolvedproblem?In ProceedingsoftheSixthConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguage
Processing(EMNLP2001) ,HongKong,China,pp.100–108.
Schütze,H.(1997). AmbiguityResolutioninLanguageLearning .Stanford,CA:CSLIPublications.
Sinclair,J.(1991). Corpus,Concordance,Collocation .Oxford,U.K.:OxfordUniversityPress.
Smadja,F.(1993).Retrievingcollocationsfromtext:Xtract. ComputationalLinguistics19 (1),143–177.
SpärckJones,K.(1983). CompoundNounInterpretationProblems.EnglewoodCliﬀes,NJ:Prentice-Hall.
Sporleder, C. and L. Li (2009). Unsupervised recognition of literal and non-literal use of idiomatic
expressions. In Proceedings of the 12th Conference of the EACL (EACL 2009) , Athens, Greece,
pp.754–762.
Stevenson, S., A. Fazly, and R. North (2004). Statistical measures of the semi-productivity of light verb
constructions. In Proceedings of the Second ACL Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Integrating
Processing ,Barcelona,Spain,pp.1–8.
Stvan,L.S.(1998).Thesemanticsandpragmaticsofbaresingularnounphrases.PhDthesis,Northwestern
University,Evanston,IL.
Tan,Y.F.,M.-Y.Kan,andH.Cui(2006).Extendingcorpus-basedidentiﬁcationoflightverbconstructions
usingasupervisedlearningframework.In ProceedingsoftheEACL2006WorkshoponMulti-Word-
expressionsinamultilingualcontext(MWEmc) ,Trento,Italy.
Tanaka, T. and T. Baldwin (2003). Noun-noun compound machine translation a feasibility study on
shallowprocessing.In ProceedingsoftheACL2003WorkshoponMultiwordExpressions: Analysis,
AcquisitionandTreatment,Sapporo,Japan,pp.17–24.
Trawiński, B., M. Sailer, and J.-P. Soehn (2006). Combinatorial aspects of collocational prepositional
phrases.InP.Saint-Dizier(Ed.), ComputationalLinguisticsDimensionsofSyntaxandSemanticsof
Prepositions.Dordrecht,theNetherlands:KluwerAcademic.
Trawiński,B.,M.Sailer,J.-P.Soehn,L.Lemnitzer,andF.Richter(2008).CranberryexpressionsinEnglish
andinGerman.In ProceedingsoftheLREC2008Workshop:TowardsaSharedTaskforMultiword
Expressions(MWE2008) ,Marrakech,Morocco,pp.35–38.
Tschichold,C.(1998).Multi-wordunitsinnaturallanguageprocessing.PhDthesis,UniversityofBasel,
Basel,Switzerland.

292 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
Tsuchiya, M., T. Shime, T. Takagi, T. Utsuro, K. Uchimoto, S. Matsuyoshi, S. Sato, and S. Nakagawa
(2006).ChunkingJapanesecompoundfunctionalexpressionsbymachinelearning.In Proceedings
of the EACL 06 Workshop on Multi-Word-expressions in a Multilingual Context , Trento, Italy, pp.
25–32.
Uchiyama, K., T.Baldwin, andS.Ishizaki(2005). DisambiguatingJapanesecompoundverbs. Computer
SpeechandLanguage,SpecialIssueonMultiwordExpressions19(4),497–512.
Vadas, D. and J. R. Curran (2008). Parsing noun phrase structure with CCG. In Proceedings of the 46th
AnnualMeetingoftheACL:HLT ,Columbus,OH,pp.335–343.
vanderBeek,L.(2005).TheextractionofdeterminerlessPPs.In ProceedingsoftheSecondACL-SIGSEM
WorkshopontheLinguisticDimensionsofPrepositionsandTheirUseinComputationalLinguisticsFormalismsandApplications,Colchester,U.K.,pp.190–199.
Vanderwende,L.(1994).Algorithmforautomaticinterpretationofnounsequences.In Proceedingsofthe
15thConferenceonComputationalLinguistics,Kyoto,Japan,pp.782–788.
Venkatapathy, S. and A. Joshi (2006). Using information about multi-word expressions for the word-
alignment task. In Proceedings of the COLING/ACL 2006 Workshop on Multiword Expressions:
IdentifyingandExploitingUnderlyingProperties ,Sydney,Australia,pp.53–60.
Villada Moirón, B. (2005). Data-driven identiﬁcation of ﬁxed expressions and their modiﬁability. PhD
thesis,Alfa-Informatica,UniversityofGroningen,Groningen,theNetherlands.
Villavicencio,A.(2005).Theavailabilityofverb-particleconstructionsinlexicalresources:Howmuchis
enough?ComputerSpeechandLanguage,SpecialIssueonMultiwordExpressions19 (4),415–432.
Villavicencio, A., T.Baldwin, andB.Waldron(2004). Amultilingualdatabaseofidioms. In Proceedings
oftheFourthInternationalConferenceonLanguageResourcesandEvaluation(LREC2004) ,Lisbon,
Portugal,pp.1127–1130.
Villavicencio, A., F. Bond, A. Korhonen, and D. McCarthy (2005). Introduction to the special issue on
multiwordexpressions:Havingacrackatahardnut. ComputerSpeechandLanguage,SpecialIssue
onMultiwordExpressions19 (4),365–377.
Widdows,D.(2005). GeometryandMeaning .Stanford,CA:CSLIPublications.
Widdows,D.andB.Dorow(2005).Automaticextractionofidiomsusinggraphanalysisandasymmetric
lexicosyntacticpatterns.In ProceedingsoftheACL2004WorkshoponDeepLexicalAcquisition,Ann
Arbor,MI,pp.48–56.
Xu,R.,Q.Lu,andS.Li(2006).ThedesignandconstructionofaChinesecollocationbank.In Proceedings
of the Fifth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006) , Genoa,
Italy.
Zhang,Y.,V.Kordoni,A.Villavicencio,andM.Idiart(2006).Automatedmultiwordexpressionprediction
for grammar engineering. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Identifying
andExploitingUnderlyingProperties ,Sydney,Australia,pp.36–44.AssociationforComputational
Linguistics.

