1
Classical Approaches to
Natural Language
Processing
Robert Dale
MacquarieUniversity1.1 Context................................................................. 31.2 TheClassicalToolkit.................................................. 4
TextPreprocessing •LexicalAnalysis •SyntacticParsing •Semantic
Analysis •NaturalLanguageGeneration
1.3 Conclusions............................................................ 6Reference...................................................................... 7
1.1 Context
The ﬁrst edition of this handbook appeared in 2000, but the project that resulted in that volume in factbegan 4 years earlier, in mid-1996. When Hermann Moisl, Harold Somers, and I started planning thecontentofthebook,theﬁeldofnaturallanguageprocessingwaslessthan10yearsintowhatsomemightcallits“statisticalrevolution.”Itwasstillearlyenoughthattherewereoccasionalsignsoffrictionbetweensomeofthe“oldguard,”whohungontothesymbolicapproachestonaturallanguageprocessingthattheyhadgrownupwith,andthe“youngturks,”withtheirnew-fangledstatisticalprocessingtechniques,whichjustkeptgainingground.Someintheoldguardwouldgivetalkspointingoutthattherewereproblemsinnaturallanguageprocessingthatwerebeyondthereachofstatisticalorcorpus-basedmethods;meanwhile,the occasional young turk could be heard muttering a variation on Fred Jelinek’s 1988 statement that“whenever I ﬁre a linguist our system performance improves.” Then there were those with an eye to afuturepeacefulcoexistencethatpromisedjobsforall,arguingthatweneededtodevelophybridtechniquesand applications that integrated the best properties of both the symbolic approaches and the statisticalapproaches.
At the time, we saw the handbook as being one way of helping to catalog the constituent tools and
techniques that might play a role in such hybrid enterprises. So, in the ﬁrst edition of the handbook,weadoptedatripartitestructure,withthe38bookchaptersbeingfairlyevenlysegregatedintoSymbolicApproaches to NLP, Empirical Approaches to NLP, and NLP based on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks. TheeditorsofthepresenteditionhaverenamedtheSymbolicApproachestoNLPpartasClassicalApproaches:that name change surely says something about the way in which things have developed over the last 10years or so. In the various conferences and journals in our ﬁeld, papers that make use of statisticaltechniques now very signiﬁcantly outnumber those that do not. The number of chapters in the presentedition of the handbook that focus on these “classical” approaches is half the number that focus on theempirical and statistical approaches. But these changes should not be taken as an indication that theearlier-established approaches are somehow less relevant; in fact, the reality is quite the opposite, as
3

4 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
the incorporation of linguistic knowledge into statistical processing becomes more and more common.
Those who argue for the study of the classics in the more traditional sense of that word make great
claims for the value of such study: it encourages the questioning of cultural assumptions, allows one to
appreciatediﬀerentculturesandvaluesystems,promotescreativethinking,andhelpsonetounderstand
thedevelopmentofideas.ThatisjustastrueinnaturallanguageprocessingasitisinthestudyofGreek
literature.
So, in the spirit of all those virtues that surely no one would question, this part of the handbook
providesthoughtfulandreﬂectiveoverviewsofanumberofareasofnaturallanguageprocessingthatare
in some sense foundational. They represent areas of research and technological development that have
been around for some time; long enough to beneﬁt from hindsight and a measured and more objective
assessmentthanispossibleforworkthatismorerecent.Thisintroductioncommentsbrieﬂyoneachof
thesechaptersasawayofsettingthesceneforthispartofthehandbookasawhole.
1.2 The Classical Toolkit
Traditionally, work in natural language processing has tended to view the process of language analysis
as being decomposable into a number of stages, mirroring the theoretical linguistic distinctions drawn
between SYNTAX,SEMANTICS ,a n dPRAGMATICS . The simple view is that the sentences of a text are ﬁrst
analyzed in terms of their syntax; this provides an order and structure that is more amenable to an
analysis in terms of semantics, or literal meaning; and this is followed by a stage of pragmatic analysis
wherebythemeaningoftheutteranceortextincontextisdetermined.Thislaststageisoftenseenasbeing
concernedwith DISCOURSE ,whereastheprevioustwoaregenerallyconcernedwithsententialmatters.This
attempt at a correlation between a stratiﬁcational distinction (syntax, semantics, and pragmatics) and
a distinction in terms of granularity (sentence versus discourse) sometimes causes some confusion in
thinkingabouttheissuesinvolvedinnaturallanguageprocessing;anditiswidelyrecognizedthatinreal
Surface textSpeaker’s intended meaning
Pragmatic analysis
Semantic analysis
Syntactic analysis
Lexical analysis
Tokenization
FIGURE 1.1 The stages of
analysis in processing natural
language.terms it is not so easy to separate the processing of language neatly into
boxes corresponding to each of the strata. However, such a separation
serves as a useful pedagogic aid, and also constitutes the basis for archi-
tectural models that make the task of natural language analysis more
manageablefromasoftwareengineeringpointofview.
Nonetheless, the tripartite distinction into syntax, semantics, and
pragmatics only serves at best as a starting point when we consider the
processingofrealnaturallanguagetexts.Aﬁner-graineddecomposition
oftheprocessisusefulwhenwetakeintoaccountthecurrentstateofthe
art in combination with the need to deal with real language data; this is
reﬂectedinFigure1.1.
Weidentifyherethestageoftokenizationandsentencesegmentation
as a crucial ﬁrst step. Natural language text is generally not made up of
the short, neat, well-formed, and well-delimited sentences we ﬁnd in
textbooks; and for languages such as Chinese, Japanese, or Thai, which
donotsharetheapparentlyeasyspace-delimitedtokenizationwemight
believe to be a property of languages like English, the ability to address
issuesoftokenizationisessentialtogettingoﬀthegroundatall.Wealso
treat lexical analysis as a separate step in the process. To some degree
thisﬁner-graineddecompositionreﬂectsourcurrentstateofknowledge
aboutlanguageprocessing:weknowquitealotaboutgeneraltechniques
for tokenization, lexical analysis, and syntactic analysis, but much less
about semantics and discourse-level processing. But it also reﬂects the

ClassicalApproachestoNaturalLanguageProcessing 5
factthattheknownisthesurfacetext,andanythingdeeperisarepresentationalabstractionthatishardertopindown;soitisnotsosurprisingthatwehavebetter-developedtechniquesatthemoreconcreteendoftheprocessingspectrum.
Of course, natural language analysis is only one-half of the story. We also have to consider natural
languagegeneration,whereweareconcernedwithmappingfromsome(typicallynonlinguistic)internalrepresentation to a surface text. In the history of the ﬁeld so far, there has been much less work onnaturallanguagegeneration thantherehasbeen onnatural languageanalysis.Onesometimeshearsthesuggestionthatthisisbecausenaturallanguagegenerationiseasier,sothatthereislesstobesaid.Thisisfarfromthetruth:thereareagreatmanycomplexitiestobeaddressedingeneratingﬂuentandcoherentmulti-sentential texts from an underlying source of information. A more likely reason for the relativelack of work in generation is precisely the correlate of the observation made at the end of the previousparagraph: it is relatively straightforward to build theories around the processing of something known(such as a sequence of words), but much harder when the input to the process is more or less left tothe imagination. This is the question that causes researchers in natural language generation to wake inthe middle of the night in a cold sweat: what does generation start from? Much work in generationis concerned with addressing these questions head-on; work in natural language understanding mayeventuallyseebeneﬁtintakinggeneration’sstartingpointasitsendgoal.
1.2.1 Text Preprocessing
Aswehavealreadynoted, notalllanguagesdelivertextintheformofwordsneatlydelimitedbyspaces.Languages such as Chinese, Japanese, and Thai require ﬁrst that a segmentation process be applied,analogous to the segmentation process that must ﬁrst be applied to a continuous speech stream inorder to identify the words that make up an utterance. As Palmer demonstrates in his chapter, therearesigniﬁcantsegmentationandtokenizationissuesinapparentlyeasier-to-segmentlanguages—suchasEnglish—too.Fundamentally,theissuehereisthatofwhatconstitutesaword;asPalmershows,thereisnoeasyanswerhere.Thischapteralsolooksattheproblemofsentencesegmentation:sincesomuchworkinnaturallanguageprocessingviewsthesentenceastheunitofanalysis,clearlyitisofcrucialimportancetoensurethat, givenatext, wecanbreakitintosentence-sizedpieces.Thisturnsoutnottobesotrivialeither.Palmeroﬀersacatalogoftipsandtechniquesthatwillbeusefultoanyonefacedwithdealingwithrealrawtextastheinputtoananalysisprocess,andprovidesahealthyreminderthattheseproblemshavetendedtobeidealizedawayinmuchearlier,laboratory-basedworkinnaturallanguageprocessing.
1.2.2 Lexical Analysis
The previous chapter addressed the problem of breaking a stream of input text into the words andsentences that will be subject to subsequent processing. The words, of course, are not atomic, and arethemselves open to further analysis. Here we enter the realms of computational morphology, the focusof Andrew Hippisley’s chapter. By taking words apart, we can uncover information that will be usefulatlaterstagesofprocessing.Thecombinatoricsalsomeanthatdecomposingwordsintotheirparts,andmaintainingrulesforhowcombinationsareformed,ismuchmoreeﬃcientintermsofstoragespacethanwould be the case if we simply listed every word as an atomic element in a huge inventory. And, oncemorereturningtoourconcernwiththehandlingofrealtexts,therewillalwaysbewordsmissingfromanysuch inventory; morphological processing can go some way toward handling such unrecognized words.Hippisley provides a wide-ranging and detailed review of the techniques that can be used to carry outmorphological processing, drawing on examples from languages other than English to demonstrate theneed for sophisticated processing methods; along the way he provides some background in the relevanttheoreticalaspectsofphonologyandmorphology.

6 HandbookofNaturalLanguageProcessing
1.2.3 Syntactic Parsing
Apresuppositioninmostworkinnaturallanguageprocessingisthatthebasicunitofmeaninganalysisisthesentence:asentenceexpressesaproposition,anidea,orathought,andsayssomethingaboutsomereal or imaginary world. Extracting the meaning from a sentence is thus a key issue. Sentences are not,however,justlinearsequencesofwords,andsoitiswidelyrecognizedthattocarryoutthistaskrequiresananalysisofeachsentence,whichdeterminesitsstructureinonewayoranother.In
NLPapproachesbased
ongenerativelinguistics,thisisgenerallytakentoinvolvethedeterminingofthesyntacticorgrammaticalstructure of each sentence. In their chapter, Ljunglöf and Wirén present a range of techniques that canbe used to achieve this end. This area is probably the most well established in the ﬁeld of
NLP, enabling
the authors here to provide an inventory of basic concepts in parsing, followed by a detailed catalog ofparsingtechniquesthathavebeenexploredintheliterature.
1.2.4 Semantic Analysis
Identifyingtheunderlyingsyntacticstructureofasequenceofwordsisonlyonestepindeterminingthemeaningofasentence;itprovidesastructuredobjectthatismoreamenabletofurthermanipulationandsubsequentinterpretation.Itisthesesubsequentstepsthatderiveameaningforthesentenceinquestion.GoddardandSchalley’schapterturnstothesedeeperissues.Itisherethatwebegintoreachtheboundsof what has so far been scaled up from theoretical work to practical application. As pointed out earlierin this introduction, the semantics of natural language have been less studied than syntactic issues, andso the techniques described here are not yet developed to the extent that they can easily be applied in abroad-coveragefashion.
Aftersettingthescenebyreviewingarangeofexistingapproachestosemanticinterpretation,Goddard
andSchalleyprovideadetailedexpositionofNaturalSemanticMetalanguage,anapproachtosemanticsthatislikelytobenewtomanyworkinginnaturallanguageprocessing.Theyendbycatalogingsomeofthechallengestobefacedifwearetodeveloptrulybroadcoveragesemanticanalyses.
1.2.5 Natural Language Generation
Attheendoftheday,determiningthemeaningofanutteranceisonlyreallyone-halfofthestoryofnaturallanguageprocessing:inmanysituations,aresponsethenneedstobegenerated,eitherinnaturallanguagealone or in combination with other modalities. For many of today’s applications, what is required hereis rather trivial and can be handled by means of canned responses; increasingly, however, we are seeingnatural language generation techniques applied in the context of more sophisticated back-end systems,where the need to be able to custom-create ﬂuent multi-sentential texts on demand becomes a priority.Thegeneration-orientedchaptersintheApplicationspartbeartestimonytothescopehere.
Inhischapter,DavidMcDonaldprovidesafar-reachingsurveyofworkintheﬁeldofnaturallanguage
generation.McDonaldbeginsbylucidlycharacterizingthediﬀerencesbetweennaturallanguageanalysisand natural language generation. He goes on to show what can be achieved using natural languagegeneration techniques, drawing examples from systems developed over the last 35 years. The bulk ofthechapteristhenconcernedwithlayingoutapictureofthecomponentprocessesandrepresentationsrequired in order to generate ﬂuent multi-sentential or multi-paragraph texts, built around the now-standarddistinctionbetweentextplanningandlinguisticrealization.
1.3 Conclusions
EarlyresearchintomachinetranslationwasunderwayinbothU.K.andU.S.universitiesinthemid-1950s,andtheﬁrstannualmeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguisticswasin1963;so,depending

ClassicalApproachestoNaturalLanguageProcessing 7
onhowyoucount,theﬁeldofnaturallanguageprocessinghaseitherpassedorisfastapproachingits50thbirthday.Alothasbeenachievedinthistime.Thispartofthehandbookprovidesaconsolidatedsummaryof the outcomes of signiﬁcant research agendas that have shaped the ﬁeld and the issues it chooses toaddress. An awareness and understanding of this work is essential for any modern-day practitionerof natural language processing; as George Santayana put it over a 100 years ago, “Those who cannotrememberthepastarecondemnedtorepeatit.”
Oneaspectofcomputationalworknotrepresentedhereisthebodyofresearchthatfocusesondiscourse
and pragmatics. As noted earlier, it is in these areas that our understanding is still very much weakerthaninareassuchasmorphologyandsyntax.Itisprobablyalsothecasethatthereiscurrentlylessworkgoing on here than there was in the past: there is a sense in which the shift to statistically based workrestarted investigations of language processing from the ground up, and current approaches have manyintermediateproblemstotacklebeforetheyreachtheconcernsthatwereoncethefocusof“thediscoursecommunity.” There is no doubt that these issues will resurface; but right now, the bulk of attention isfocused on dealing with syntax and semantics.
∗When most problems here have been solved, we can
expecttoseearenewedinterestindiscourse-levelphenomenaandpragmatics,andatthatpointthetimewill be ripe for another edition of this handbook that puts classical approaches to discourse back on thetableasasourceofideasandinspiration.Meanwhile,agoodsurveyofvariousapproachescanbefoundinJurafskyandMartin(2008).
Reference
Jurafsky,D.andMartin,J.H.,2008, SpeechandLanguageProcessing:AnIntroductiontoNaturalLanguage
Processing, Speech Recognition, and Computational Linguistics , 2nd edition. Prentice-Hall, Upper
SaddleRiver,NJ.
∗Anotableexceptionistheconsiderablebodyofworkontextsummarizationthathasdevelopedoverthelast10years.



