p/CX /CX3 Linguistic Essentials
This chapter introduces basic linguistic concepts, which are neces-
sary for making sense of discussions in the rest of the book. It may partly
be a review of things you learned at school, but it will go into more depth
for syntactic phenomena like attachment ambiguities and phrase struc-ture that are important in
NLP. Apart from syntax (sentence structure),
we will cover some morphology (word formation) and semantics (mean-ing). The last section will give an overview of other areas of linguisticsand pointers to further reading.
3.1 Parts of Speech and Morphology
Linguists group the words of a language into classes (sets) which showsimilar syntactic behavior, and often a typical semantic type. Theseword classes are otherwise called syntactic orgrammatical categories ,
syntactic
categories
grammatical
categoriesbut more commonly still by the traditional name parts of speech (POS).
parts of speechThree important parts of speech are noun ,verb,a n d adjective .Nouns
nountypically refer to people, animals, concepts and things. The prototypi-
calverb is used to express the action in a sentence. Adjectives describe
verb
adjectiveproperties of nouns. The most basic test for words belonging to the same
class is the substitution test . Adjectives can be picked out as words that substitution test
occur in the frame in (3.1):
(3.1) The8
>>>>>><
>>>>>>:sad
intelligentgreenfat...9
>>>>>>=
>>>>>>;one is in the corner.

p/CX /CX82 3 Linguistic Essentials
In sentence (3.2), the noun children refers to a group of people (those
of young age) and the noun candy to a particular type of food:
(3.2) Children eat sweet candy.
The verb eatdescribes what children do with candy. The adjective sweet
tells us about a property of candy, namely that it is sweet. Many words
have multiple parts of speech: candy can also be a verb (as in Too much
boiling will candy the molasses ), and, at least in British English, sweet
can be a noun, meaning roughly the same as candy . Word classes are
normally divided into two. The open orlexical categories are ones like open word class
lexical categoriesnouns, verbs and adjectives which have a large number of members, and
to which new words are commonly added. The closed orfunctional cat- closed word class
functional
categoriesegories are categories such as prepositions and determiners (containing
words like of, on, the, a ) which have only a few members, and the mem-
bers of which normally have a clear grammatical use. Normally, the vari-ous parts of speech for a word are listed in an online dictionary , otherwise
dictionary
known as a lexicon . lexicon
Traditional systems of parts of speech distinguish about 8 categories,
but corpus linguists normally want to use more ﬁne-grained classiﬁca-
tions of word classes. There are well-established sets of abbreviations
for naming these classes, usually referred to as POStags. In this chapter, tags
as we introduce syntactic categories, we will give the abbreviations used
in the Brown corpus for the more important categories. For example, ad-jectives are tagged using the code JJ in the Brown corpus. Because of itspioneering role, the Brown corpus tags are particularly widely known.
We brieﬂy describe and compare several well-known tag sets in sec-
tion 4.3.2.
Word categories are systematically related by morphological processes
morphological
processes such as the formation of the plural form ( dog-s ) from the singular form of
plural
singularthe noun ( dog). Morphology is important in NLPbecause language is pro-
ductive: in any given text we will encounter words and word forms thatwe haven’t seen before and that are not in our precompiled dictionary.Many of these new words are morphologically related to known words.
So if we understand morphological processes, we can infer a lot about
the syntactic and semantic properties of new words.
It is important to be able to handle morphology in English, but it’s abso-
lutely essential when it comes to highly inﬂecting languages like Finnish.In English, a regular verb has only 4 distinct forms, and irregular verbshave at most 8 forms. One can accomplish a fair amount without mor-

p/CX /CX3.1 Parts of Speech and Morphology 83
phology, by just listing all word forms. In contrast, a Finnish verb has
more than 10,000 forms! For a language like Finnish, it would be tediousand impractical to enumerate all verb forms as an enormous list.
The major types of morphological process are inﬂection, derivation,
and compounding. Inﬂections are the systematic modiﬁcations of a root
inﬂection
root formform by means of preﬁxes andsuﬃxes to indicate grammatical distinc-
preﬁxes
sufﬁxestions like singular and plural. Inﬂection does not change word class or
meaning signiﬁcantly, but varies features such as tense, number, andplurality. All the inﬂectional forms of a word are often grouped as mani-festations of a single lexeme .
lexeme
Derivation is less systematic. It usually results in a more radical change derivation
of syntactic category, and it often involves a change in meaning. An ex-
ample is the derivation of the adverb widely from the adjective wide (by
appending the suﬃx -ly).Widely in a phrase like it is widely believed
means among a large well-dispersed group of people , a shift from the core
meaning of wide (extending over a vast area ). Adverb formation is also
less systematic than plural inﬂection. Some adjectives like oldordiﬃcult
don’t have adverbs: *oldly and*diﬃcultly are not words of English. Here
are some other examples of derivations: the suﬃx -entransforms adjec-
tives into verbs ( weak-en ,soft-en ), the suﬃx -able transforms verbs into
adjectives ( understand-able ,accept-able ), and the suﬃx -ertransforms
verbs into nouns ( teach-er ,lead-er ).
Compounding refers to the merging of two or more words into a new compounding
word. English has many noun-noun compounds, nouns that are combi-
nations of two other nouns. Examples are tea kettle ,disk drive ,o rcollege
degree . While these are (usually) written as separate words, they are pro-
nounced as a single word, and denote a single semantic concept, which
one would normally wish to list in the lexicon. There are also othercompounds that involve parts of speech such as adjectives, verbs, andprepositions, such as downmarket ,(to) overtake ,a n d mad cow disease .
We will now introduce the major parts of speech of English.
3.1.1 Nouns and pronouns
Nouns typically refer to entities in the world like people, animals, and
things. Examples are:
(3.3) dog, tree, person, hat, speech, idea, philosophy

p/CX /CX84 3 Linguistic Essentials
Type of inﬂection Instances
number singular, plural
gender feminine, masculine, neuter
case nominative, genitive, dative, accusative
Table 3.1 Common inﬂections of nouns.
English, which is morphologically impoverished compared to many
other languages, has only one inﬂection of the noun, the plural form.It is usually formed by appending the suﬃx -s. Here are some nouns with
their singular and plural forms.
(3.4) dog : dogs tree : trees person : persons
hat : hats speech : speeches woman : womenidea : ideas philosophy : philosophies child : children
The plural suﬃx has three pronunciations, /s/ as in hats,/ z / ,a si n boys,
and /es/ as in speeches , the last case being represented by insertion of
anein the writing system. A few forms like women don’t follow the
regular pattern, and are termed irregular . irregular
Number (singular and plural) is one common grammatical distinction
that is marked on the noun. Two other types of inﬂection that are com-mon for nouns across languages are gender and case as shown in ta-ble 3.1.
English does not have a system of gender inﬂections, but it does have
diﬀerent gender forms for the third person singular pronoun: he(mas-
culine), she(feminine), and it(neuter). An example of gender inﬂection
of nouns from Latin is the endings -afor feminine and -usfor masculine.
Examples: ﬁli-us ‘son, male child’; ﬁli-a ‘daughter, female child.’ In some
languages, grammatical gender is closely correlated with the sex of theperson referred to as it is for these two Latin words (female !feminine,
male!masculine, neither !neuter), but in other languages gender is a
largely arbitrary grammatical category. An example linguists are fond of
is the German word for girl, Mädchen , which is neuter.
In some languages, nouns appear in diﬀerent forms when they have
diﬀerent functions (subject, object, etc.) in a sentence, and these formsare called cases . For example, the Latin for ‘son’ is ﬁlius when the subject,
case
butﬁlium when the object of a verb. Many languages have a rich array
of case inﬂections, with cases for locatives, instrumentals, etc. English

p/CX /CX3.1 Parts of Speech and Morphology 85
has no real case inﬂections. The only case relationship that is systemati-
cally indicated is the genitive. The genitive describes the possessor. Forexample, the phrase the woman’s house indicates that the woman owns
the house. The genitive is usually written ’s, but just as ’after words
that end in s, which includes most plural nouns such as in the students’
grievances . Although ’sinitially looks like a case inﬂection, it is actu-
ally what is termed a clitic, also known as a phrasal aﬃx , because it can
clitic
appear not only attached to nouns, but after other words that modify a
noun, as in the person you met’s house was broken into .
Pronouns are a separate small class of words that act like variables pronoun
in that they refer to a person or thing that is somehow salient in the
discourse context. For example, the pronoun shein sentence (3.5) refers
to the most salient person (of feminine gender) in the context of use,
which is Mary.
(3.5) After Mary arrived in the village, shelooked for a bed-and-breakfast.
As well as distinguishing the number of their antecedent, they also
mark person (1st = speaker, 2nd = hearer, or 3rd = other discourse enti-ties). They are the only words in English which appear in diﬀerent formswhen they are used as the subject and the object of a sentence. We callthese forms the nominative orsubject case andaccusative orobject case
nominative
subject case
accusative
object casepersonal pronouns, respectively. Pronouns also have special forms, pos-
possessive pronounssessive pronouns , for when they are a possessor, as in my car , which we
can view as genitive case forms. Somewhat oddly, English pronouns have
another possessive form, often called the ‘second’ possessive personalpronoun, used when the object of the preposition ofdescribes the pos-
sessor: af r i e n do f mine . Finally, there are reﬂexive pronouns ,w h i c ha r e
reﬂexive pronouns
used similarly to ordinary (personal) pronouns except that they always
refer to a nearby antecedent in the same sentence, normally the subjectof the sentence. For example, herself in sentence (3.6a) must refer to
Mary whereas herin sentence (3.6b) cannot refer to Mary (that is, Mary
saw a woman other than herself in the mirror).
(3.6) a. Mary saw herself in the mirror.
b. Mary saw her in the mirror.
Reﬂexive pronouns (and certain other expressions like each other )a r e
often referred to as anaphors , and must refer to something very nearby
anaphors
in the text. Personal pronouns also refer to previously discussed people

p/CX /CX86 3 Linguistic Essentials
Nominative Accusative Possessive 2nd Possessive Reﬂexive
Tag(s) PPS ( 3sg) PPO PP$ PP$$ PPL
PPSS ( 1sg,2sg,pl ) (PPLS for pl)
1sg I me my mine myself
2sg you you your yours yourself
3sg masc he him his his himself
3sg fem she her her hers herself
3sg neut it it its its itself
1pl we us our ours ourselves
2pl you you your yours yourselves
3pl they them their theirs themselves
Table 3.2 Pronoun forms in English. Second person forms do not distinguish
number, except in the reﬂexive, while third person singular forms distinguish
gender.
and things, but at a slightly greater distance. All the forms for pronouns,
and their Brown tags are summarized in table 3.2.
Brown tags. NN is the Brown tag for singular nouns ( candy ,woman ).
The Brown tag set also distinguishes two special types of nouns, proper
nouns (orproper names ), and adverbial nouns . Proper nouns are names proper names
adverbial nounslikeMary ,Smith ,o r United States that refer to particular persons or
things. Proper nouns are usually capitalized. The tag for proper nouns isNNP.
1Adverbial nouns (tag NR) are nouns like home ,west andtomorrow
that can be used without modiﬁers to give information about the circum-stances of the event described, for example the time or the location. Theyhave a function similar to adverbs (see below). The tags mentioned so far
have the following plural equivalents: NNS (plural nouns), NNPS (plural
proper nouns), and NRS (plural adverbial nouns). Many also have posses-sive or genitive extensions: NN$ (possessive singular nouns), NNS$ (pos-sessive plural nouns), NNP$ (possessive singular proper nouns), NNPS$(possessive plural proper nouns), and NR$ (possessive adverbial nouns).The tags for pronouns are shown in table 3.2.
1. Actually, the Brown tag for proper nouns was NP, but we follow the Penn Treebank in
substituting NNP, so that NP can maintain its conventional meaning within linguistics ofa noun phrase (see below). We also follow the Penn Treebank in using a doubled N in therelated tags mentioned subsequently.

p/CX /CX3.1 Parts of Speech and Morphology 87
3.1.2 Words that accompany nouns: Determiners and adjectives
Several other parts of speech most commonly appear accompanying
nouns. Determiners describe the particular reference of a noun. A sub- determiner
type of determiners is articles . The article theindicates that we’re talking article
about someone or something that we already know about or can uniquely
determine. We say the tree if we have already made reference to the tree
or if the reference is clear from context such as when we are standing
next to a tree and it is clear we are referring to it. The article a(oran)
indicates that the person or thing we are talking about was not previouslymentioned. If we say at r e e , then we are indicating that we have not men-
tioned this tree before and its identity cannot be inferred from context.Other determiners include the demonstratives ,s u c ha s thisandthat.
demonstratives
Adjectives are used to describe properties of nouns. Here are some adjective
adjectives (in italics):
(3.7) a redrose, this long journey, many intelligent children, a very trendy
magazine
Uses such as these modifying a noun are called attributive oradnominal . attributive
adnominalAdjectives also have a predicative u s ea sac o m p l e m e n to f be:
predicative
(3.8) The rose is red. The journey will be long.
Many languages mark distinctions of case, number, and gender on ar-
ticles and adjectives as well as nouns, and we then say that the article oradjective agrees with the noun, that is, they have the same case, number,
agreement
and gender. In English, the morphological modiﬁcations of adjectives are
the derivational endings like -lywhich we covered earlier, and the for-
mation of comparative (richer ,trendier ), and superlative (richest ,trendi- comparative
superlativeest) forms. Only some, mainly shorter, adjectives form morphological
comparatives and superlatives by suﬃxing -erand-est. For the rest, pe- periphrastic forms
riphrastic forms are used ( more intelligent ,most intelligent ). Periphrastic
forms are formed with the auxiliary words, in this case more andmost .
The basic form of the adjective ( rich,trendy ,intelligent ) is called the posi- positive
tivewhen contrasted with comparative and superlative. Comparative and
superlative forms compare diﬀerent degrees to which the property de-
scribed by the adjective applies to nouns. The following example shouldbe self-explanatory:
(3.9) John is rich, Paul is richer, Mary is richest.

p/CX /CX88 3 Linguistic Essentials
Brown tags. The Brown tag for adjectives (in the positive form) is JJ,
for comparatives JJR, for superlatives JJT. There is a special tag, JJS,for the ‘semantically’ superlative adjectives chief ,main ,a n d top.N u m -
bers are subclasses of adjectives. The cardinals, such as one,two,a n d
6,000,000 , have the tag CD. The ordinals, such as ﬁrst,second ,tenth ,a n d
mid-twentieth have the tag OD.
The Brown tag for articles is AT. Singular determiners, like this,that,
have the tag DT; plural determiners ( these ,those ) DTS; determiners that
can be singular or plural ( some ,any) DTI, and ‘double conjunction’ deter-
miners ( either ,neither ) DTX.
Quantiﬁers are words that express ideas like ‘all,’ ‘many,’ ‘some.’ The
quantiﬁer
determiners some andany can function as quantiﬁers. Other parts of
speech that correspond to quantiﬁers have the tags ABN (pre-quantiﬁer:
all,many ) and PN (nominal pronoun: one,something ,anything ,some-
body ). The tag for there when used to express existence at the beginning
of a sentence is EX.
A ﬁnal group of words that occur with or instead of nouns are the in- interrogative
pronouns terrogative pronouns anddeterminers which are used for questions and
interrogative
determinersrelative clauses. Their tags are WDT ( wh-determiner: what ,which ), WP$
(possessive wh-pronoun: whose ), WPO (objective wh-pronoun: whom ,
which ,that), and WPS (nominative wh-pronoun: who,which ,that).
3.1.3 Verbs
Verbs are used to describe actions ( Shethrew the stone ), activities ( She
walked along the river ) and states ( Ihave $50). A regular English verb
has the following morphological forms:
the root or base form :walk base form
the third singular present tense: walks
the gerund and present participle: walking
the past tense form and past/passive participle: walked
Most of these forms do duty in several functions. The base form is used
for the present tense . present tense
(3.10) I walk. You walk. We walk. You (guys) walk. They walk.
The third singular person has a diﬀerent present tense form:

p/CX /CX3.1 Parts of Speech and Morphology 89
(3.11) She walks. He walks. It walks.
The base form is also used for the inﬁnitive with to: inﬁnitive
(3.12) She likes to walk . She has to walk .To walk is fun.
and after modals and in the bare inﬁnitive:
(3.13) She shouldn’t walk. She helped me walk.
The-ingform is used for the progressive (indicating that an action is in progressive
progress):
(3.14) She is walking. She was walking. She will be walking.
and as the gerund , a derived form where the verb gains some or all of the gerund
properties of nouns:
(3.15) This is the most vigorous walking I’ve done in a long time. Walking is
fun.
The-edform serves as past tense indicating an action that took place
in the past:
(3.16) She walked.
It also functions as the past participle in the formation of present perfect : present perfect
(3.17) She has walked.
andpast perfect : past perfect
(3.18) She had walked.
A number of verbs are irregular and have diﬀerent forms for past tense irregular
and past participle. Examples are drive andtake:
(3.19) a. She drove the car. She has never driven ac a r .
b. She took oﬀ on Monday. She had already taken oﬀ on Monday.
Just as nouns are commonly marked for features like number and
case, verbs are also commonly marked for certain features. Table 3.3summarizes grammatical features that are commonly indicated on verbsacross languages. These features can be indicated either morphologically(also called synthetically ), as in the case of the English endings -s,-ing,
synthetic forms

p/CX /CX90 3 Linguistic Essentials
Feature Category Instances
subject number singular, plural
subject person ﬁrst ( Iw a l k ), second ( you walk ), third ( she walks )
tense present tense, past tense, future tenseaspect progressive, perfectmood/modality possibility, subjunctive, irrealisparticiples present participle ( walking ), past participle ( walked )
voice active, passive, middle
Table 3.3 Features commonly marked on verbs.
and-ed), or by means of auxiliaries , words that accompany verbs in a auxiliaries
verb group (also called analytically ). English uses the auxiliaries have , verb group
analytic formsbe,a n d will(and others) to express aspect, mood, and some tense infor-
mation. The present and past perfect are formed with have as we saw
in sentences (3.17) and (3.18). The progressive is formed with be(3.14).
Forms that are built using auxiliaries, as opposed to direct inﬂection as
in the case of the English past tense, are referred to as periphrastic forms . periphrastic forms
In English, there is a class of verbs with special properties: the modal modal auxiliaries
auxiliaries ormodals . Modals lack some of the forms of ordinary verbs
(no inﬁnitive, no progressive form), and always come ﬁrst in the verbgroup. They express modalities like possibility ( may,can) or obligation
(should ) as illustrated in the following examples:
(3.20) a. With her abilities, she cando whatever she wants to.
b. He may ormay not come to the meeting.
c. You should spend more time with your family.
In English, the formation of the future tense with the auxiliary willis in
all ways parallel to that of other modalities:
(3.21) She willcome. She willnot come.
Brown tags. The Brown tag set uses VB for the base form ( take), VBZ for
the third person singular ( takes ), VBD for the past tense ( took), VBG for
gerund and present participle ( taking ), and VBN for the past participle
(taken ). The tag for modal auxiliaries ( can,may,must ,could ,might ,. . . )
is MD. Since be,have ,a n d doare important in forming tenses and moods,

p/CX /CX3.1 Parts of Speech and Morphology 91
the Brown tag set has separate tags for all forms of these verbs. We omit
them here, but they are listed in table 4.6.
3.1.4 Other parts of speech
Adverbs, prepositions, and particles
We have already encountered adverbs as an example of morphological
derivation. Adverbs modify a verb in the same way that adjectives modify adverb
nouns. Adverbs specify place, time, manner or degree:
(3.22) a. She often travels to Las Vegas.
b. She allegedly committed perjury.
c. She started her career oﬀ very impressively .
S o m ea d v e r b s ,s u c ha s often , are not derived from adjectives and lack the
suﬃx -ly.
Some adverbs can also modify adjectives ((3.23a) and (3.23b)) and other
adverbs (3.23c).
(3.23) a. a very unlikely event
b. ashockingly frank exchange
c. She started her career oﬀ very impressively.
Certain adverbs like very are specialized to the role of modifying ad-
jectives and adverbs and do not modify verbs. They are called degree degree adverbs
adverbs . Their distribution is thus quite distinct from other adverbs, and
they are sometimes regarded as a separate part of speech called quali- qualiﬁer
ﬁers.
Prepositions are mainly small words that prototypically express spatial preposition
relationships:
(3.24) inthe glass, onthe table, over their heads, about an interesting idea,
concerning your recent invention
Most prepositions do double duty as particles. Particles are a subclass particle
of prepositions that can enter into strong bonds with verbs in the forma-
tion of so-called phrasal verbs . We can best think of a phrasal verb as phrasal verbs
a separate lexical entry with syntactic and semantic properties diﬀerent
from the verb it was formed from. Here are some examples:

p/CX /CX92 3 Linguistic Essentials
(3.25) a. The plane took oﬀ at 8am.
b. Don’t give in to him.
c. It is time to take on new responsibilities.
d. He was put oﬀ by so much rudeness.
Sometimes these constructions can occur with the preposition separated
from the verb:
(3.26) a. I didn’t want to take that responsibility onright now.
b. He putmeoﬀ.
These phrasal verbs have particular meanings that are quite specialized,
and unpredictable from the verb and particle that make them up.
Sometimes we need to know the meaning of a sentence to be able to
distinguish particles and prepositions: upis a preposition in (3.27a) and
a particle in (3.27b). Note the meaning shift from the literal meaning ofrunning on an incline in (3.27a) to the ﬁgurative meaning of building up
a large bill in (3.27b).
(3.27) a. She ran up a hill.
b. She ran up a bill.
Brown tags. The tags for adverbs are RB (ordinary adverb: simply ,late,
well,little), RBR (comparative adverb: later,better ,less), RBT (superlative
adverb: latest ,best,least ),(not), QL (qualiﬁer: very,too,extremely ), and
QLP (post-qualiﬁer: enough ,indeed ). Two tags stand for parts of speech
that have both adverbial and interrogative functions: WQL ( wh-qualiﬁer:
how) and WRB ( wh-adverb: how,when ,where ).
The Brown tag for prepositions is IN, while particles have the tag RP.
Conjunctions and complementizers
The remaining important word categories are coordinating and subordi-
nating conjunctions. Coordinating conjunctions ‘conjoin’ or coordinate
coordinating
conjunction
coordinationtwo words or phrases of (usually) the same category:
husband andwife [nouns]

p/CX /CX3.2 Phrase Structure 93
She bought orleased the car. [verbs]
the green triangle andthe blue square [noun phrases]
She bought her car, butshe also considered leasing it. [sentences]
One function of coordinating conjunctions is to link two sentences (or
clauses ) as shown in the last example. This can also be done by subordi- clause
subordinating
conjunctionnating conjunctions . In the examples below, the subordinating conjunc-
tion is shown in italics.
(3.28) a. She said that he would be late. [proposition]
b. She complained because he was late. [reason]
c. I won’t wait ifhe is late. [condition]
d. She thanked him although he was late. [concession]
e. She left before he arrived. [temporal]
Cases of subordinating conjunctions like that in (3.28a) or use of for
which introduce arguments of the verb are often alternatively regardedascomplementizers . The diﬀerence between coordination and subordi-
complementizers
nation is that, as the terms suggest, coordination joins two sentences
as equals whereas subordination attaches a secondary sentence to a pri-
mary sentence. The secondary sentence often expresses a proposition,a reason, a condition, a concession or a temporally related event.
Brown tags. The tag for conjunctions is CC. The tag for subordinating
conjunctions is CS.
3.2 Phrase Structure
Words do not occur in just any old order. Languages have constraintsonword order . But it is also the case that the words in a sentence are
word order
not just strung together as a sequence of parts of speech, like beads on a
necklace. Instead, words are organized into phrases , groupings of words phrases
that are clumped as a unit. Syntax is the study of the regularities and syntax
constraints of word order and phrase structure.
One fundamental idea is that certain groupings of words behave as
constituents . Constituents can be detected by their being able to occur constituent

p/CX /CX94 3 Linguistic Essentials
in various positions, and showing uniform syntactic possibilities for ex-
pansion. The examples in (3.29) and (3.30) show evidence from position-ing and phrasal expansion for a constituent that groups nouns and theirmodiﬁers:
(3.29) a. I put the bagels in the freezer.
b.The bagels , I put in the freezer.
c. I put in the fridge the bagels (that John had given me)
(3.30)8
>>>>>>>>><
>>>>>>>>>:She
the woman
the tall woman
the very tall woman
the tall woman with sad eyes
...9
>>>>>>>>>=
>>>>>>>>>;saw8
>>>>>>>>><
>>>>>>>>>:him
the man
the short man
the very short man
the short man with red hair
...9
>>>>>>>>>=
>>>>>>>>>;.
This is the notion of a paradigmatic relationship in Saussurean linguis-
paradigmatic
relationship tics. All elements that can be replaced for each other in a certain syntactic
position (like the noun phrase constituent above) are members of oneparadigm . In contrast, two words bear a syntagmatic relationship if they
paradigm
syntagmatic
relationshipcan form a phrase (or syntagma ) like sewed clothes orsewed a dress .A n
syntagmaimportant class of syntagmatically related words are collocations (chap-
collocations ter 5).
In this section we will brieﬂy mention some of the major phrase types,
and then introduce techniques linguists use to model phrase structure.The upshot will be to suggest that English sentences typically have anoverall phrase structure that looks as follows:
(3.31) S
NP
That manVP
VBD
caughtNP
the butterﬂyPP
IN
withNP
an e t
A whole sentence is given the category S. A sentence normally rewrites
as a subject noun phrase and a verb phrase.

p/CX /CX3.2 Phrase Structure 95
Noun phrases. A noun is usually embedded in a noun phrase (NP), a syn- noun phrase
tactic unit of the sentence in which information about the noun is gath-
ered. The noun is the head of the noun phrase, the central constituent head
that determines the syntactic character of the phrase. Noun phrases are
usually the arguments of verbs, the participants in the action, activity
or state described by the verb. Noun phrases normally consist of an op-
tional determiner, zero or more adjective phrases, a noun head, and thenperhaps some post-modiﬁers, such as prepositional phrases or clausalmodiﬁers, with the constituents appearing in that order. Clausal mod-iﬁers of nouns are referred to as relative clauses . Here is a large noun
relative clauses
phrase that indicates many of these possibilities:
(3.32) The homeless old man in the park that I tried to help yesterday
Prepositional phrases. Prepositional phrases (PPs) are headed by a prepositional
phrases preposition and contain a noun phrase complement. They can appear
within all the other major phrase types. They are particularly common
in noun phrases and verb phrases where they usually express spatial andtemporal locations and other attributes.
Verb phrases. Analogous to the way nouns head noun phrases, the verb
is the head of the verb phrase (VP). In general, the verb phrase organizes
verb phrase
all elements of the sentence that depend syntactically on the verb (ex-
cept that in most syntactic theories the verb phrase does not contain thesubject noun phrase). Some examples of verb phrases appear in (3.33):
(3.33) a. Getting to school on time was a struggle.
b. He was trying to keep his temper .
c. That woman quickly showed me the way to hide .
Adjective phrases. Complex adjective phrases (APs) are less common,
adjective phrases
but encompass examples like the phrases shown in bold in these sen-
tences: She is very sure of herself ;He seemed a man who was quite
certain to succeed .

p/CX /CX96 3 Linguistic Essentials
3.2.1 Phrase structure grammars
A syntactic analysis of a sentence tells us how to determine the meaning
of the sentence from the meaning of the words. For example, it will tell uswho does what to whom in the event described in a sentence. Compare:
(3.34) Mary gave Peter a book.
(3.35) Peter gave Mary a book.
Sentences (3.34) and (3.35) use the same words, but have diﬀerent mean-
ings. In the ﬁrst sentence, the book is transferred from Mary to Peter, inthe second from Peter to Mary. It is the word order that allows us to inferwho did what to whom.
Some languages like Latin or Russian permit many diﬀerent ways of
ordering the words in a sentence without a change in meaning, and in-
stead use case markings to indicate who did what to whom. This type oflanguage is called a free word order language, meaning that word order
free word order
isn’t used to indicate who the doer is – word order is then usually used
mainly to indicate discourse structure. Other languages such as Englishare more restrictive in the extent to which words can move around in asentence. In English, the basic word order is Subject – Verb – Object:
(3.36) The children (subject) should (auxiliary verb) eat spinach (object).
In general, this order is modiﬁed only to express particular ‘mood’ cat-
egories. In interrogatives (or questions), the subject and ﬁrst auxiliary
interrogatives
verb are inverted : inverted
(3.37) Should (auxiliary verb) the children (subject) eat spinach (object)?
If the statement would involve no auxiliary, a form of doappears in the
initial position ( Did he cry? ). In imperatives (commands or requests), imperatives
there is no subject (it is inferred to be the person who is addressed):
(3.38) Eat spinach!
Basic sentences are called declaratives when contrasted with interroga- declaratives
tives and imperatives.
The regularities of word order are often captured by means of rewrite rewrite rules
rules . A rewrite rule has the form ‘category !category*’ and states that
the symbol on the left side can be rewritten as the sequence of symbolson the right side. To produce a sentence of the language, we start withthestart symbol ‘S’ (for sentence). Here is a simple set of rewrite rules:
start symbol

p/CX /CX3.2 Phrase Structure 97
(3.39) S !NP VP AT !the
NP!8
><
>:AT NNS
AT NNNP PP9
>=
>;NNS!8
><
>:children
studentsmountains9
>=
>;
VP!8
><
>:VP PP
VBD
VBD NP9
>=
>;VBD!8
><
>:slept
ate
saw9
>=
>;
P!IN NP IN !(
in
of)
NN!cake
The rules on the righthand side rewrite one of the syntactic categories
(or part of speech symbols) introduced in the previous sections into aword of the corresponding category. This part of the grammar is oftenseparated oﬀ as the lexicon . The nature of these rules is that a certain
lexicon
syntactic category can be rewritten as one or more other syntactic cat-
egories or words. The possibilities for rewriting depend solely on the
category, and not on any surrounding context, so such phrase structuregrammars are commonly referred to as context-free grammars .
context-free
grammars With these rules, we can derive sentences. Derivations (3.40) and (3.41)
are two simple examples.
(3.40) S
!NP VP
!AT NNS VBD
!The children slept
(3.41) S
!NP VP
!AT NNS VBD NP
!AT NNS VBD AT NN
!The children ate the cake
The more intuitive way to represent phrase structure is as a tree. We refer
to the leaf nodes of the tree as terminal nodes and to internal nodes as terminal nodes
nonterminal nodes . In such a tree each nonterminal node and its immedi- nonterminal nodes
ate daughters, otherwise known as a local tree corresponds to the appli- local tree
cation of a rewrite rule. The order of daughters generates the word order
of the sentence, and the tree has a single root node, which is the startsymbol of the grammar. Trees (3.42) and (3.43) correspond to deriva-

p/CX /CX98 3 Linguistic Essentials
tions (3.40) and (3.41). Each node in the tree shows something that we
are hypothesising to be a constituent .
(3.42) S
NP
AT
TheNNS
childrenVP
VBD
slept
(3.43) S
NP
AT
TheNNS
childrenVP
VBD
ateNP
AT
theNN
cake
A third and ﬁnal way to show constituency is via a (labeled) bracketing . bracketing
Sets of brackets delimit constituents and may be labeled to show the
category of the nonterminal nodes. The labeled bracketing for (3.43) is(3.44):
(3.44) [ s[np[atThe][nnschildren ]] [vp[vbd ate][np[atthe][nncake]]]]
A property of most formalizations of natural language syntax in terms
of rewrite rules is recursivity: the fact that there are constellations in
recursivity
which rewrite rules can be applied an arbitrary number of times. In our
example grammar, a PP contains an NP which can in turn contain an-other PP. Thus we can get recursive expansions as in the example inﬁgure 3.1. Here, the sequence of prepositional phrases is generated by
multiple application of the rewrite rule cycle “NP !NP PP; PP!IN NP.”
The derivation applies the cycle twice, but we could apply it three, four,or a hundred times.
Recursivity makes it possible for a single nonterminal symbol like VP or
NP to be expanded to a large number of words. (For example, in ﬁgure 3.1the symbol VP is expanded to nine words: ate the cake of the children in

p/CX /CX3.2 Phrase Structure 99
S
NP
DT
theNNS
studentsVP
VBD
ateNP
NP
DT
theNN
cakePP
IN
ofNP
NP
DT
theNN
childrenPP
IN
inNP
DT
theNN
mountains
Figure 3.1 An example of recursive phrase structure expansion.
the mountains .) One consequence is that two words that were gener-
ated by a common rewrite rule and are syntactically linked can becomeseparated by intervening words as the derivation of a sentence proceeds.These types of phenomena are called non-local dependencies because two
non-local
dependencies words can be syntactically dependent even though they occur far apart
in a sentence.
One example of a dependency that can be non-local is subject-verb subject-verb
agreement agreement , the fact that the subject and verb of a sentence agree in num-
ber and person. We have She walks ,He walks ,It walks versus Iw a l k ,You
walk,We walk ,They walk . That is, the verb has the ending -sindicating
third person singular if and only if the subject is in the third person sin-gular. Subject and verb agree even if other words and phrases interveneas in the following example.
(3.45) The women who found the wallet were given a reward.
If we looked only at immediate neighbors it would seem that we would
have to say the wallet was . Only a complete syntactic analysis of the
sentence reveals that The women is the subject and the form of to be has
to be in the plural.

p/CX /CX100 3 Linguistic Essentials
Another important case of non-local dependencies is the class known
aslong-distance dependencies ,s u c ha s wh-extraction .2The name is based long-distance
dependencies
wh-extractionon the theory that phrases such as which book in (3.46b) are moved (or
extracted) from an underlying position (after the verb as in (3.46a)) totheir “surface” position (the beginning of the sentence as in (3.46b)).
(3.46) a. Should Peter buy a book ?
b.Which book should Peter buy?
Without making any commitment to such a movement theory, it is clear
that we have to recognize a long distance dependency between buyand
which book . Otherwise we would not be able to tell that book is an argu-
ment of buy.
Non-local phenomena are a challenge for some Statistical
NLPapproa-
ches liken-grams that model local dependencies. An n-gram model
would predict that the word after wallet in (3.45) is was,n o t were . These
issues are further discussed at the beginning of chapter 11.
A ﬁnal feature of many versions of phrase structure grammar is empty
nodes. Empty nodes occur when a nonterminal may be rewritten as noth- empty nodes
ing. For example, noting that one can also say Eat the cake! without a
subject NP, one might suggest adding a rule NP !;. An NP nonterminal
is then allowed to be rewritten as nothing. This is often represented byputting a;or aneunder the node in the tree. Using this notation, the
tree in (3.46b) could be given the structure in (3.47):
(3.47) S
00
NP
Which bookS0
MD
shouldS
NP
PeterVP
VB
buyNP
e
2. In the speech literature, the term ‘long-distance dependencies’ regularly refers to any-
thing beyond the range of a trigram model. We have termed such eﬀects ‘non-local depen-dencies,’ and have reserved the term ‘long-distance dependencies’ for its usual linguisticmeaning of a dependency that appears to be able to cross any number of nodes in aphrase structure tree.

p/CX /CX3.2 Phrase Structure 101
The simple model of phrase structure that we have developed here
adopts a context-free view of language. For example, once we have ex- context-free
panded ‘VP’ to ‘VBD NP’ and then to ‘ sewed NP,’ we can replace NP with
whatever noun phrase we please. The context provided by the verb sewed
is inaccessible when we decide how to expand NP. This inaccessibility of
context is the key property of a context-free grammar. We could expand
VP to a natural phrase like sewed clothes , but we can as easily choose a
nonsensical expansion like sewed wood blocks .
How to include necessary dependencies is a central topic in probabilis-
tic parsing, which we discuss in chapter 12.
3.2.2 Dependency: Arguments and adjuncts
Another important organizing notion is the concept of dependents .I n a dependency
sentence like:
(3.48) Sue watched the man at the next table.
Sueandthe man are dependents of a watching event. We will say that
they are the two arguments of the verb watch .T h eP P at the next table is
a dependent of man. It modiﬁes man.
Most commonly, noun phrases are arguments of verbs. The arguments
of verbs can be described at various levels. One can classify the argu-ments via semantic roles .T h e agent of an action is the person or thing
semantic roles
agentthat is doing something, the patient is the person or thing that is having
patientsomething done to it, and other roles like instrument andgoal describe
yet other classes of semantic relationships. Alternatively, one can de-scribe the syntactic possibilities for arguments in terms of grammaticalrelations. All English verbs take a subject , which is the noun phrase that
subject
appears before the verb. Many verbs take an object noun phrase, which object
normally appears immediately after the verb. Pronouns are in the sub-
ject case when they are subjects of a verb, and in the object case when
they are objects of a verb. In our earlier example, here repeated as sen-
tence (3.49), children is the subject of eat(the children are the agents
of the action of eating), and sweet candy is the object of eat(the sweet
candy is the thing being acted upon, the patient of the action):
(3.49) Children eat sweet candy.

p/CX /CX102 3 Linguistic Essentials
Note that the morphological form of candy does not change. In English,
pronouns are the only nouns that change their forms when used in theobject case.
Some verbs take two object noun phrases after the verb, both in the
object case:
(3.50) She gave him the book.
In this sentence, himis the indirect object (describing the recipient , the
indirect object
recipient one who indirectly gets something) and the book is the direct object (de-
direct objectscribing the patient). Other such verbs are verbs of sending and verbs of
communication:
(3.51) a. She sent her mother the book.
b. She emailed him the letter.
Such verbs often allow an alternate expression of their arguments where
the recipient appears in a prepositional phrase:
(3.52) She sent the book to her mother.
Languages with case markings normally distinguish these NPs and ex-
press patients in the accusative case and recipients in the dative case.
There are systematic associations between semantic roles and gram-
matical functions, for example agents are usually subjects, but there arealso some dissociations. In Bill received a package from the mailman ,i t
is the mailman who appears to be the agent. The relationships betweensemantic roles and grammatical functions are also changed by voice al-
ternations (the one feature in table 3.3 which we did not discuss earlier).
Many language make a distinction between active voice andpassive voice
active voice
passive voice(or simply active andpassive ). Active corresponds to the default way of
expressing the arguments of a verb: the agent is expressed as the subject,the patient as the object:
(3.53) Children eat sweet candy.
In the passive, the patient becomes the subject, and the agent is demoted
to an oblique role. In English this means that the order of the two argu-ments is reversed, and the agent is expressed by means of a prepositionalby-phrase. The passive is formed with the auxiliary beand the past par-
ticiple:

p/CX /CX3.2 Phrase Structure 103
(3.54) Candy is eaten by children.
In other languages, the passive alternation might just involve changes in
case marking, and some morphology on the verb.
Subcategorization
As we have seen, diﬀerent verbs diﬀer in the number of entities (persons,
animals, things) that they relate. One such diﬀerence is the contrast be-tween transitive andintransitive verbs. Transitive verbs have a (direct)
transitive
intransitiveobject, intransitive verbs don’t:
(3.55) a. She brought a bottle of whiskey.
b. She walked (along the river).
In sentence (3.55a), a bottle of whiskey is the object of brought . We cannot
use the verb bring without an object: we cannot say She brought. The
verb walk is an example of an intransitive verb. There is no object in
sentence (3.55). There is, however, a prepositional phrase expressing thelocation of the activity.
Syntacticians try to classify the dependents of verbs. The ﬁrst distinc-
tion they make is between arguments and adjuncts. The subject, object,and direct object are arguments. In general, arguments express entities
arguments
that are centrally involved in the activity of the verb. Most arguments are
expressed as NPs, but they may be expressed as PPs, VPs, or as clauses:
(3.56) a. We deprived him of food .
b. John knows that he is losing .
Arguments are divided into the subject, and all non-subject arguments
which are collectively referred to as complements . complements
Adjuncts are phrases that have a less tight link to the verb. Adjuncts adjuncts
are always optional whereas many complements are obligatory (for ex-
ample, the object of bring is obligatory). Adjuncts can also move around
more easily than complements. Prototypical examples of adjuncts arephrases that tell us the time, place, or manner of the action or state thatthe verb describes as in the following examples:
(3.57) a. She saw a Woody Allen movie yesterday .
b. She saw a Woody Allen movie in Paris .

p/CX /CX104 3 Linguistic Essentials
c. She saw the Woody Allen movie with great interest .
d. She saw a Woody Allen movie with a couple of friends .
Subordinate clauses (sentences within a sentence) can also be either subordinate
clauses adjuncts or subcategorized arguments, and can express a variety of rela-
tionships to the verb. In the examples we saw earlier in (3.28), (a) involvesan argument clause, while the rest are adjuncts.
Sometimes, it’s diﬃcult to distinguish adjuncts and complements. The
prepositional phrase on the table is a complement in the ﬁrst sentence
(it is subcategorized for by putand cannot be omitted), an adjunct in the
second (it is optional):
(3.58) She put the book on the table .
(3.59) He gave his presentation on the stage .
The traditional argument/adjunct distinction is really a reﬂection of the
categorical basis of traditional linguistics. In many cases, such as thefollowing, one seems to ﬁnd an intermediate degree of selection:
(3.60) a. I straightened the nail with a hammer .
b. He will retire in Florida .
It is not clear whether the PPs in italics should be regarded as being cen-
trally involved in the event described by the verb or not. Within a Sta-tistical
NLPapproach, it probably makes sense to talk instead about the
degree of association between a verb and a dependent.
We refer to the classiﬁcation of verbs according to the types of com-
plements they permit as subcategorization . We say that a verb subcate- subcategorization
gorizes for a particular complement. For example, bring subcategorizes
for an object. Here is a list of subcategorized arguments with examplesentences.
Subject. The children eat candy.
Object. The children eat candy .
Prepositional phrase. She put the book on the table .
Predicative adjective. We made the man angry .
Bare inﬁnitive. She helped me walk.

p/CX /CX3.2 Phrase Structure 105
Inﬁnitive with to.She likes to walk .
Participial phrase. She stopped singing that tune eventually.
That -clause. She thinks that it will rain tomorrow .T h e that can usu-
ally be omitted: She thinks it will rain tomorrow .
Question-form clauses. She is wondering why it is raining in August .
She asked me what book I was reading .
While most of these complements are phrasal units that we have already
seen, such as NPs and APs, the ﬁnal entries are not, in that they are aunit bigger than an S. The clause why it is raining in August consists of a
whole sentence it is raining in August plus an additional constituent out
front. Such a “large clause” is referred to as an S
0(pronounced “S Bar”)
constituent. Relative clauses and main clause questions are also analyzedas S
0constituents.
Often verbs have several possible patterns of arguments. A particular
set of arguments that a verb can appear with is referred to as a subcatego- subcategorization
frame rization frame . Here are some subcategorization frames that are common
in English.
Intransitive verb. NP[subject]. The woman walked .
Transitive verb. NP[subject], NP[object]. John loves Mary .
Ditransitive verb. NP[subject], NP[direct object], NP[indirect object].
Mary gave Peter ﬂowers .
Intransitive with PP. NP[subject], PP. I rent in Paddington .
Transitive with PP. NP[subject], NP[object], PP. She put the book on the
table .
Sentential complement. NP[subject], clause. I know (that) she likes
you.
Transitive with sentential complement. NP[subj], NP[obj], clause. She
told me that Gary is coming on Tuesday .
Subcategorization frames capture syntactic regularities about comple-
ments. There are also semantic regularities which are called selectional selectional
restrictions restrictions orselectional preferences . For example, the verb bark prefers
selectional
preferencesdogs as subjects. The verb eatprefers edible things as objects:

p/CX /CX106 3 Linguistic Essentials
(3.61) The Chihuahua barked all night.
(3.62) I eat vegetables every day.
Sentences that violate selectional preferences sound odd:
(3.63) a. The cat barked all night.
b. I eat philosophy every day.
Selectional preferences are further discussed in section 8.4.
3.2.3 X0theory
Phrase structure rules as presented above do not predict any systematic-
ity in the way that phrases in natural languages are made, nor any reg-ularities for the appearance of diﬀerent kinds of dependents in clauses.
However, modern syntax has stressed that there are a lot of such regu-
larities. An important idea is that a word will be the head of a phrase.
head
The reason why we talk about noun phrases and prepositional phrases
is because they are a constituent consisting of a noun or preposition re-spectively, and all their dependents. The noun or preposition heads thephrase.
3Linguists have further argued that there is a broad systematicity
in the way dependents arrange themselves around a head in a phrase. A
head forms a small constituent with its complements. This constituent
can be modiﬁed by adjuncts to form a bigger constituent, and ﬁnally thisconstituent can combine with a speciﬁer , a subject or something like a
speciﬁer
determiner to form a maximal phrase. An example of the general picture
is shown in (3.64):
(3.64) NP
Det
theN0
AP
deﬁnitiveN0
N
studyPP
of subcategorization
3. Recall, however, that verb phrases, as normally described, are slightly anomalous, since
they include all the complements of the verb, but not the subject.

p/CX /CX3.2 Phrase Structure 107
The intermediate constituents are referred to as N0nodes (pronounced
“N bar nodes”). This is basically a two bar level theory (where we thinkof XP as X
00), but is complicated by the fact that recursive adjunction of adjunction
modiﬁers is allowed at the N0level to express that a noun can have any
number of adjectival phrase modiﬁers. Sometimes people use theories
with more or fewer bar levels.
The ﬁnal step of the argument is that while there may be diﬀerences
in word order, this general pattern of constituency is repeated acrossphrase types. This idea is referred to as X
0theory, where the X is taken
to represent a variable across lexical categories.
3.2.4 Phrase structure ambiguity
So far we have used rewrite rules to generate sentences. It is more com- generation
mon to use them in parsing , the process of reconstructing the deriva- parsing
tion(s) or phrase structure tree(s) that give rise to a particular sequence
of words. We call a phrase structure tree that is constructed from a sen-
tence a parse . For example, the tree in (3.43) is a parse of sentence (3.41). parse
In most cases, there are many diﬀerent phrase structure trees that
could all have given rise to a particular sequence of words. A parserbased on a comprehensive grammar of English will usually ﬁnd hundredsof parses for a sentence. This phenomenon is called phrase structureambiguity or syntactic ambiguity . We saw an example of a syntactically
syntactic
ambiguity ambiguous sentence in the introduction, example (1.10): Our company
is training workers. One type of syntactic ambiguity that is particularly
frequent is attachment ambiguity . attachment
ambiguity Attachment ambiguities occur with phrases that could have been gen-
erated by two diﬀerent nodes. For example, according to the grammarin (3.39), there are two ways to generate the prepositional phrase with a
spoon in sentence (3.65):
(3.65) The children ate the cake with a spoon.
It can be generated as a child of a verb phrase, as in the parse tree shown
in ﬁgure 3.2 (a), or as a child of one of the noun phrases, as in the parse
tree shown in ﬁgure 3.2 (b).
Diﬀerent attachments have diﬀerent meanings. The ‘high’ attachment
to the verb phrase makes a statement about the instrument that the chil-dren used while eating the cake. The ‘low’ attachment to the noun phrasetells us which cake was eaten (the cake with a spoon, and not, say, the

p/CX /CX108 3 Linguistic Essentials
(a) S
NP
AT
TheNNS
childrenVP
VP
VBD
ateNP
AT
theNN
cakePP
IN
withNP
AT
aNN
spoon
(b) S
NP
AT
TheNNS
childrenVP
VBD
ateNP
NP
AT
theNN
cakePP
IN
withNP
AT
aNN
spoon
Figure 3.2 An example of a prepositional phrase attachment ambiguity.
cake with icing). So resolving attachment ambiguities can be important
for ﬁnding the correct semantic interpretation.
A much-studied subclass of syntactic ambiguity is the phenomenon
ofgarden pathing . A garden path sentence leads you along a path that garden paths
suddenly turns out not to work. For example, there might turn out to be
additional words in the sentence that do not seem to belong there:
(3.66) The horse raced past the barn fell.
Sentence (3.66) from (Bever 1970) is probably the most famous example
of a garden path sentence. By the time most people get to the word barn ,
they have constructed a parse that roughly corresponds to the meaning

p/CX /CX3.3 Semantics and Pragmatics 109
‘The horse ran past the barn.’ But then there is an additional word fell
that cannot be incrementally added to this parse. We have to backtracktoraced and construct a completely diﬀerent parse, corresponding to
the meaning The horse fell after it had been raced past the barn. Garden
pathing is the phenomenon of ﬁrst being tricked into adopting a spurious
parse and then having to backtrack to try to construct the right parse.
Garden-path sentences are rarely a problem in spoken language. Se-
mantic preferences, the generosity of speakers in following communica-tive maxims, and intonational patterns all usually prevent us from gardenpathing (MacDonald et al. 1994; Tanenhaus and Trueswell 1995). We cansee this in sentence (3.66) where an intonational break between horse and
raced would tip the hearer oﬀ that raced introduces a reduced relative
clause, not the verb of the main clause. However, garden-pathing can be
a real problem when reading complex sentences of written English.
We have seen examples of sentences with more than one parse due
to syntactic ambiguity. Most sentences are of this type. But it is alsopossible that a sentence will have no parse at all. The reason could be thata rule was used in the generation of the sentence that is not covered bythe grammar. The other possibility is that the sentence is ungrammatical
ungrammatical
or not syntactically well-formed. Here is an example of an ungrammatical
sentence.
(3.67) *Slept children the.
It is important to distinguish ungrammaticality from semantic abnormal-
ity. Sentences like the following are odd, but they are jarring becausetheir semantic interpretation is incoherent whereas (3.67) does not havean interpretation at all.
(3.68) a. Colorless green ideas sleep furiously.
b. The cat barked.
People often use a hash mark (#) to indicate semantic, pragmatic, or cul-
tural oddness, as opposed to the marks we introduced earlier for syntac-tic illformedness.
3.3 Semantics and Pragmatics
Semantics is the study of the meaning of words, constructions, and utter-ances. We can divide semantics into two parts, the study of the meaning

p/CX /CX110 3 Linguistic Essentials
of individual words (or lexical semantics ) and the study of how meanings lexical semantics
of individual words are combined into the meaning of sentences (or even
larger units).
One way to approach lexical semantics is to study how word meanings
are related to each other. We can organize words into a lexical hierarchy,
as is the case, for example, in WordNet, which deﬁnes hypernymy and hypernymy
hyponymy . A hypernym or hyperonym4is a word with a more general hyponymy
hyperonymsense, for example, animal is a hypernym of cat. A hyponym is a word
with a more specialized meaning: catis a hyponym of animal . (In general,
ifw1is a hypernym of w2, thenw2is a hyponym of w1.)Antonyms are antonyms
words with opposite meanings: hotandcold orlong andshort .T h ep a r t -
whole relationship is called meronymy . The word tireis a meronym of meronymy
carandleaf is a meronym of tree. The whole corresponding to a part is
called a holonym . holonym
Synonyms are words with the same meaning (or very similar meaning): synonyms
carandautomobile are synonyms. Homonyms are words that are written homonyms
the same way, but are (historically or conceptually) really two diﬀerent
words with diﬀerent meanings which seem unrelated. Examples are suit
(‘lawsuit’ and ‘set of garments’) and bank (‘river bank’ and ‘ﬁnancial insti-
tution’). If a word’s meanings (or senses ) are related, we call it a polyseme . senses
polysemeThe word branch is polysemous because its senses (‘natural subdivision
of a plant’ and ‘a separate but dependent part of a central organization’)are related. Lexical ambiguity can refer to both homonymy and polysemy.
ambiguity
The subcase of homonymy where the two words are not only written the
same way, but also have identical pronunciation, is called homophony .S o homophony
the words bass for a species of ﬁsh and bass for a low-pitched sound are
homonyms, but they are not homophones.
Disambiguating word senses is the topic of chapter 7.
Once we have the meanings of individual words, we need to assemble
them into the meaning of the whole sentence. That is a hard problembecause natural language often does not obey the principle of composi-
compositionality
tionality by which the meaning of the whole can be strictly predicted from
the meaning of the parts. The word white refers to very diﬀerent colors
in the following expressions:
(3.69) white paper, white hair, white skin, white wine
White hair is grey, a white skin really has a rosy color, and white wine
4. The latter is prescriptively correct. The former is more commonly used.

p/CX /CX3.3 Semantics and Pragmatics 111
is actually yellow (but yellow wine doesn’t sound very appealing). The
groupings white hair ,white skin ,a n d white wine are examples of colloca- collocations
tions. The meaning of the whole is the sum of the meanings of the part
plus some additional semantic component that cannot be predicted fromthe parts.
Collocations are the topic of chapter 5.
If the relationship between the meaning of the words and the meaning
of the phrase is completely opaque, we call the phrase an idiom . For ex-
idiom
ample, the idiom to kick the bucket describes a process, dying, that has
nothing to do with kicking and buckets. We may be able to explain thehistorical origin of the idiom, but in today’s language it is completelynon-compositional. Another example is the noun-noun compound car-
riage return for the character that marks the end of a line. Most younger
speakers are not aware of its original meaning: returning the carriage ofa typewriter to its position on the left margin of the page when startingan e wl i n e .
There are many other important problems in assembling the meanings
of larger units, which we will not discuss in detail here. One exampleis the problem of scope . Quantiﬁers and operators have a scope which
scope
extends over one or more phrases or clauses. In the following sentence,
we can either interpret the quantiﬁer everyone as having scope over the
negative not(meaning that not one person went to the movie), or we can
interpret the negation as having scope over the quantiﬁer (meaning thatat least one person didn’t go to the movie):
(3.70) Everyone didn’t go to the movie.
In order to derive a correct representation of the meaning of the sentence,
we need to determine which interpretation is correct in context.
The next larger unit to consider after words and sentences is a dis-
course . Studies of discourse seek to elucidate the covert relationships
between sentences in a text. In a narrative discourse, one can seek to
describe whether a following sentence is an example, an elaboration, a
restatement, etc. In a conversation one wants to model the relationshipbetween turns and the kinds of speech acts involved (questions, state-ments, requests, acknowledgments, etc.). A central problem in discourse
discourse analysis
analysis is the resolution of anaphoric relations . anaphoric
relations
(3.71) a. Mary helped Peter get out of the cab. Hethanked her.

p/CX /CX112 3 Linguistic Essentials
b. Mary helped the other passenger out of the cab. The man had asked
her to help him because of his foot injury.
Anaphoric relations hold between noun phrases that refer to the same
person or thing. The noun phrases Peter andHein sentence (3.71a) and
the other passenger andThe man in sentence (3.71b) refer to the same
person. The resolution of anaphoric relations is important for informa- information
extraction tion extraction . In information extraction, we are scanning a text for a
speciﬁc type of event such as natural disasters, terrorist attacks or cor-porate acquisitions. The task is to identify the participants in the event
and other information typical of such an event (for example the purchase
price in a corporate merger). To do this task well, the correct identi-ﬁcation of anaphoric relations is crucial in order to keep track of theparticipants.
(3.72) Hurricane Hugo destroyed 20,000 Florida homes. At an estimated cost
of one billion dollars, the disaster has been the most costly in the state’s
history.
If we identify Hurricane Hugo andthe disaster as referring to the same
entity in mini-discourse (3.72), we will be able to give Hugo as an an-
swer to the question: Which hurricanes caused more than a billion dollars
worth of damage?
Discourse analysis is part of pragmatics , the study of how knowledge
pragmatics
about the world and language conventions interact with literal meaning.
Anaphoric relations are a pragmatic phenomenon since they are con-strained by world knowledge. For example, for resolving the relationsin discourse (3.72), it is necessary to know that hurricanes are disasters.
Most areas of pragmatics have not received much attention in Statistical
NLP, both because it is hard to model the complexity of world knowledge
with statistical means and due to the lack of training data. Two areas thatare beginning to receive more attention are the resolution of anaphoricrelations and the modeling of speech acts in dialogues.
3.4 Other Areas
Linguistics is traditionally subdivided into phonetics, phonology, mor-phology, syntax, semantics, and pragmatics. Phonetics is the study of thephysical sounds of language, phenomena like consonants, vowels and in-tonation. The subject of phonology is the structure of the sound systems

p/CX /CX3.5 Further Reading 113
in languages. Phonetics and phonology are important for speech recogni-
tion and speech synthesis, but since we do not cover speech, we will notcover them in this book. We will introduce the small number of phoneticand phonological concepts we need wherever we ﬁrst refer to them.
In addition to areas of study that deal with diﬀerent levels of language,
there are also subﬁelds of linguistics that look at particular aspects of
language. Sociolinguistics studies the interactions of social organization
sociolinguistics
and language. The change of languages over time is the subject of histori- historical
linguistics cal linguistics . Linguistic typology looks at how languages make diﬀerent
use of the inventory of linguistic devices and how they can be classiﬁedinto groups based on the way they use these devices. Language acquisi-tion investigates how children learn language. Psycholinguistics focuses
on issues of real-time production and perception of language and on
the way language is represented in the brain. Many of these areas holdrich possibilities for making use of quantitative methods. Mathematicallinguistics is usually used to refer to approaches using non-quantitativemathematical methods.
3.5 Further Reading
In-depth overview articles of a large number of the subﬁelds of linguisticscan be found in (Newmeyer 1988). In many of these areas, the inﬂuenceof Statistical
NLPcan now be felt, be it in the widespread use of corpora,
or in the adoption of quantitative methods from Statistical NLP.
De Saussure 1962 is a landmark work in structuralist linguistics. An
excellent in-depth overview of the ﬁeld of linguistics for non-linguists isprovided by the Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language (Crystal 1987). See
also (Pinker 1994) for a recent popular book. Marchand (1969) presents
an extremely thorough study of the possibilities for word derivation inEnglish. Quirk et al. (1985) provide a comprehensive grammar of English.Finally, a good work of reference for looking up syntactic (and many mor-phological and semantic) terms is (Trask 1993).
Good introductions to speech recognition and speech synthesis are:
(Waibel and Lee 1990; Rabiner and Juang 1993; Jelinek 1997).

pa/CX /CX114 3 Linguistic Essentials
3.6 Exercises
Exercise 3.1 [«]
What are the parts of speech of the words in the following paragraph?
(3.73) The lemon is an essential cooking ingredient. Its sharply fragrant juice and
tangy rind is added to sweet and savory dishes in every cuisine. This enchantingbook, written by cookbook author John Smith, oﬀers a wonderful array of recipescelebrating this internationally popular, intensely ﬂavored fruit.
Exercise 3.2 [«]
Think of ﬁve examples of noun-noun compounds.
Exercise 3.3 [«]
Identify subject, direct object and indirect object in the following sentence.
(3.74) He baked her an apple pie.
Exercise 3.4 [«]
What is the diﬀerence in meaning between the following two sentences?
(3.75) a. Mary defended her.
b. Mary defended herself.
Exercise 3.5 [«]
What is the standard word order in the English sentence (a) for declaratives,
(b) for imperatives, (c) for interrogatives?
Exercise 3.6 [«]
What are the comparative and superlative forms for the following adjectives and
adverbs?
(3.76) good, well, eﬀective, big, curious, bad
Exercise 3.7 [«]
Give base form, third singular present tense form, past tense, past participle,
and present participle for the following verbs.
(3.77) throw, do, laugh, change, carry, bring, dream
Exercise 3.8 [«]
Transform the following sentences into the passive voice.
(3.78) a. Mary carried the suitcase up the stairs.
b. Mary gave John the suitcase.

p/CX /CX3.6 Exercises 115
Exercise 3.9 [«]
What is the diﬀerence between a preposition and a particle? What grammatical
function does inhave in the following sentences?
(3.79) a. Mary lives in London.
b . W h e nd i dM a r ym o v ei n ?c. She puts in a lot of hours at work.d. She put the document in the wrong folder.
Exercise 3.10 [«]
Give three examples each of transitive verbs and intransitive verbs.
Exercise 3.11 [«]
What is the diﬀerence between a complement and an adjunct? Are the itali-
cized phrases in the following sentences complements or adjuncts? What typeof complements or adjuncts?
(3.80) a. She goes to Church on Sundays .
b. She went to London .
c. Peter relies on Mary for help with his homework.
d. The book is lying on the table .
e. She watched him with a telescope .
Exercise 3.12 [«]
The italicized phrases in the following sentences are examples of attachment
ambiguity. What are the two possible interpretations?
(3.81) Mary saw the man with the telescope .
(3.82) The company experienced growth in classiﬁed advertising and preprinted inserts .
Exercise 3.13 [«]
Are the following phrases compositional or non-compositional?
(3.83) to beat around the bush, to eat an orange, to kick butt, to twist somebody’s
arm, help desk, computer program, desktop publishing, book publishing, thepublishing industry
Exercise 3.14 [«]
Are phrasal verbs compositional or non-compositional?
Exercise 3.15 [«]
In the following sentence, either a few actors oreverybody can take wide scope
over the sentence. What is the diﬀerence in meaning?
(3.84) A few actors are liked by everybody.



