S Natural Langua ge
B. Mechanical Translation
The concept of translation from one language to another by machine Is older than the
computer Itself. According to Yehoshua Bar-Hillel , one of the early investigators In the field,
the Idea was perhaps first conceived as early as the early 1930s by P. P. Smirnov -
• Troyansky of the Soviet Union and G. B. Artsouni of France (see Bar-Hillel , 1960, p. 7). Their
work apparently never received much attention , lying dormant until a decade later when the
climate was much more favorable , due to the recent invention of the dIgItal computer. In
certain quarters of the scientific world people imagined--with some justIfication--that
computers would lead to many entirely new and far-reaching ideas about man and--perhaps
less Justifiably--that computers would help bring about a new world order. in short, there
was tremendous excItement over the potential of these new thinkin g mach ines, as they were
quickly dubbed. This was also the time when Claude Shannon was formulating his Ideas on
Information theory, when Norbert Wiener was devising the concept of cybernet ics, and when
Pltta and McCullough were developing their ideas on neural nets and brain function .
Moreover , computing had just passed its initial tests, during the war, with flying colors--In
such strategic tasks as breaking codes and calculating complicated nuclear cross sections.
It would be well to bear In mind that, when machine translation work began, programming
was done by wiring boards and machine language was the only computer language available.
Such concepts as arrays and subroutines were still to appear , not to mention pushdown
stacks , compiler languages , recursive procedures , and the like. Furthermore , no one had
heard of context-free and context-sens itive grammars , or of transformational grammars, or
augmented transition networks. At the forefront of computation al linguistics , the application of
the computer to the study of language , were statistical expesiments with language , such as
compiling matrices of letter frequencies and of transition frequencies between successive
letters. Such matrices could be used to produce Interesting sa~pies of pseudo-language , by
producing words from randomly generated letters with th. same characteristics as English
words. (Also, see the discussion of Yngve’s random text generation system In Article E).
First Attempts
The real genesis of machine translation dates from a series of discussions between
Warren Weaver and A. Donald Booth in 1946. Both men were familiar with the work on code
breaking by computers , based on letter-frequency and word-frequency tables. it seemed to
them that some of the same methods would be applicable to translation and that the principal
obstacle would be incorporating a full dictionary of the two languages. Of course they
recognized that simply having a dictionary would not solve all problems. Some of the
remaining problems would be the following : (a) Many words have several translations ,
depending upon context; (b) word orders difrsr from language to language; and (c) idiomatic
expressions cannot be translated word for word but must be translated in (0(0.
Nevertheless , It appeared plausible , it the time, that the major problem in translating
between two languages was simply that of vocabulary--and so at least a large part of
translation seemed mechanizable.
In 1947, Booth and D. H. V. Britten worked out a program for dictionary lookup. This
was a full-form dictionary, In that each variant of any basic word (e.g., ~~~~~~~ loves, iovlno,
etc.) had to be carrIed as a separate entry in the dictionary. In 1948, R. H. Rlchenn
suggested the addition of rules concerning the inflections of words, so that the redundancy

B Mechanical Translat Ion 7
of the multiple dictionary entries could be eliminated. In 1949, Warren Weaver distributed a
memorandum entitled Translation to about two hundred of his acquaintances , and a
considerable wave of Interest ensued. In addition to the idea that all languages have many
features in common, three other items from that memorandum are worth repeating. The first
Is the notion of a window through which one can view exactly 2N + 1 words of text; Weaver
suggests that when N Is sufficIently large, one will be able to determ ine the unique , Correct
translation for the word that sits in the middle of the wIndow. He then points out that N may
be a function of the word, rather than a constant , and discusses the idea of choosing a value
of N such that, say, 951. of all words would be correctly translated 98% of the time. The
second Is this IntrIguing statement: “When I look at an article In RussIan, I say, This Is really
written in English, built has been coded in some strange symbols. 1 wIll now proceed to decode. ” This
certaInly carries to an extreme the concept that source text and translated text “say the
same thing.” In fact, It leads naturally to the third provocative idea of the memorandum that
translating between languages A and B means going from A to an intermediate “universal
language ,” or interlingue, that, supposedly, all humans share, and thence to B. This Idea, of
an Intermed iate representat ion of the semantics or meaning of an utterance , appears often in
modern natural language processing work In Al under the heading representation of knowledge
(see discussion in the Overview and In the Handbook Section on Knowledge Repre sentetion). 
—
After Weaver ’s memorandum , work sprang up in several centers in the United States.
Erwin Relfier conceived the Idea of two auxiliary functions to be performed by human beings,
those of pre-edlior and post-editor. The pre-editor would prepare the input text to be as free
as possible of ambiguities and other sources of difficulty; the post-editor would take the
machine-trans lated text and turn it into grammatical , comprehensible prose.
A 1952 conference produced recommendations to implement a dictlonary-lookup
progra m and to work towards the invention , or discovery, of the hypothetical universal
language , called Machinese , which Weave r had proposed as an intermedIate language in
mechanical translation.
A. G. Oettlnger was one of the first to design a program that carrIed out word-for-word
translation of Russian text into English. A very high percentage of the Russian words had
more than one possible translation; so all of them were listed In the output English , enclosed
in parentheses. Thus, a sample of English output text read as follows :
(In, At, Into, To, For, On) (last, latter, new, latest, lowest , worst) (time,
tense) for analysis and synthesis relay-contact electrical (circuit,
diagram , scheme) parailel-(serles , successive , consecutive ,
consiste nt) (connection , Junction , combination) (with, from) (success ,
luck) (to be utilize, to be take advantage of) ipparatus Boolean
algebra. (Oettinger , 1955, p. 55)
A cleaned-up version of this sentence reads: “In recent times Boolean algebra has been
successfully employed In the analysIs of relay networks of the series-parallel type” (p. 58).
Readers of the translated text were expected to discern from the Jumb le of synonyms what
the cleaned-up text really should be. Clearly, there was still a long, long way to go toward
mechanical translation.
In the next year or two, most of the effort was directed toward devising ways to
handle different endings of inflected words and estimating the siz. of vocabu lary needed for 

~
8 Natural Language
translations of varying degrees of quality. In 1954 a Journal of mechanical translation was
founded , called MT. Machine translation received considerable public attention when a
group from IBM and Georgetown UniversIty made grand claims for a program that translated
from Russian to English, although this program was not particularly advanced over any others.
in any case, machine translation became an “In” thing and groups sprang up In many
countries.
Problems Encountered
Early attempts focusing on syntactic informat ion were able to produce only Iow-quaiity
translation and led eventually to extreme pessimism about the possibility of the endeavor. It
has since become clear that hIgh-quality translation systems must in some sense understand
the input text before they can recons truct ft in a second language. For the first time, It was
becoming apparent that much “world knowledge ” is used implicitly when human beings
translate from one language to another. Bar-Hillel gave as an example the pair of sentences ,
“The pen Is in the box,” and “The box Is in the pen.” Of this example he said, “I now claim
that no existing or imaginable program will enable an electronic computer to determine that
the word ~~~~~“ In the second sentence has the meaning “an enclosure where small children
can play” (Bar-Hillel , 1980, p. 159). He goes on to remark that, to his amazement , no one had
ever pointed out that In language understanding there Is a world-modeling process going on
in the mind of the listener and that people are constantly making use of this subconscious
process to guide their understanding of what is being said. Bar-Hillel continues:
A translation machine should not only be supplied wIth a dictionary but
also with a universal encyclopedia. This is surely utterly chimerical
and hardly deserves any further discussion. . . . We know. . . facts by
inferences which we are able to perform . . . instantaneously, and it is
clear that they are not, In any serious sense, stored In our memory .
Though one could envisage that a machine would be capable of
performing the same inferences , there exists so far no serious
proposal for a scheme that would make a machine perform such
Inferences in the same or similar circumstances under which an
intelligent human being would perfor m them. (pp. 160-181)
Bar-Hillel despaired of ever achieving satisfactory machIne translation. His sentiments
were not universally shared, but in 1968 they came to prevail officially in the so-called
ALPAC report (NRC, 1988). ThIs report, made to the National Research Council after a year
of study by Its Automatic Language Processing Advisory Committee , resulted in the
discontinuance of funding for moat machine transat ion projects. The report stated:
“Machine Translation0 presumably means going by algorithm from
machine- readable source text to useful target text, without recours e
to human translation or editing. in this context , there has been no
machine translation of general scientific text, and none Is In Immediate
prospect. (p. 19)
Examples of the output of sever al MT systems were included in the report ; they showed
little improvem ent from the results Oettinger had obtained ten years before. Even with
L ~~~~~~~~~ ~~~~~• ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ____

B Mechanical TranslatIon S
postediting the output was found to be generally of poorer quality, and sometimes slower and
more expens ive to obtain, than ent irely human translation.
Current Status
The conclusions of the ALPAC report were directed only against funding for MT as a
practical tool. Support for computational linguistics, evaluated in terms of Its scientific worth
rather than its immediate utility, was to b. continued. it was also recognized that there had
been fundamenta’ - changes in the study of linguistics , partly due to cross-fertilIzatIon with
computational activities.
Both linguistics and computer science have made contributions relevant to the revival
of MT research. A signal event was the publication In 1957 of Noam Chomsky ’s Syntactic
Structures , In which :ran.rformatlonal grammars were Introduced. This book spurred many new
developments In the analysIs of syntax. Concur rently, new computer languages and newtypes of data structures were being explored by computer scientists , leading to the creation
(in 1960) of both ALGO l. and LISP, with their features of lists, recurs ion , etc. These
languages were the first in a series of languages geared more toward symbol manipulation
than “number crunching, ” as discussed in the Al Progremivin g Lengiagss Section of the
Handbook . In artificial intelligence , the 1900s saw considerable progress toward natural
language understanding, such as the development of programs that carried on a dialogue of
sorts with the user: BASEBALL, SAD-SAM , STUDENT , SIR, etc., which are described in Article
Fl.
The early 1970s have seen some revival of interest In machine translation , partly
because some progress has been made in the internal representation of knowled ge. The
programs of Wliks (ArtIcle F~) and Schank (Articles F5 and FB) can both perform translation
tasks. They begin by translating input sentences Into internal data structures based on
semantic primitives , which are inte~ided to be “language independent” --elements of meaning
that are common to all natural languages. The internal representation can be manipulated
relatively easily by procedures that carry out inferences; it forms In effect an Internal
language or lncerlingua for modeling the world. The data structure(s) derived from an Input
sentence could be considered to be a translation of that sentence Into Weaver ’s Mach inese.
The reverse derivation (I.e., Machinese to, say, French) then Is a realization , on some level.
of Weaver ’s idea (see Article E for research on the generation of text.)
It Is difficult to evaluate the practicality of machine translation . In some applications it
Is worthwhile to have even a very bad translation , if it can be done by a computer in a much
shorter time (or much more cheaply) than by humans. In others (such as the preparation of
instruction manuals) It is possIble to deal with input texts that use a specially restricted form
of the language , thereby making transiation easier. There is also the possIbilIty of machine-
human Interactive translating, in which the output of the computer is used not by the ultimate
reader but by someone engaged In producIng the final translation . The computer can be used
to do sub-tasks like dIctIonary lookup, or can produce more-or-less complete translations
that are then checked and polished by a human post-editor , who perhaps does not know the
original language.
At the current time, computers are being used in these ways in a number of translation
system . . There Is also a renewed interest In fully automatic translation , based on some of
I
L ~~~~~. ____________ ___

— ~ --,-~ .-—, .- ... -.-
10 Natural Language
the the techniques for dealing with meaning descr ibed below. However , It Is not clear
whether we are yet ready to reattack the goal of “fully automatic high quality translation. ”Much current work on language Is based on a belief that deep understanding of what Is being
sold Is vital to every language use. Applied to translation , this means that we must first
have a program that understands a subject before we can translate material about that
subject. Since our ability to model large areas of knowledge is still primitive , this places a
strong limit on the scope of material we might handle.
References
A brief, popular review of current work in mechanical translation can be found In Wllks
(197 Ta). For the earliest history, see the Introd uction to Locke & Booth (1956). Later
surveys include Bar-Hillel (1960), Josselson (1071), and Hays & Mathias (1976).
See also Bar-Hillel (1964), Booth (1967), NRC (1966), Oettinger (1966), Schank(1976), Weaver (1949), and WIiks (1973). 
~~~~~ - - -. --- -,— - ,
~~~- 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~~

